JAPAN TIMES 2 
Global forest fire carbon emissions have jumped 60% in 20 years




                    
Carbon dioxide emissions from forest fires have surged 60% globally since 2001, as more and bigger blazes tore through fast-warming regions outside the tropics, according to a new study.
The research, published Thursday in the journal Science, shows that wildfires are getting worse, particularly in one climate-sensitive area — the northern boreal forests, which span from Russia to North America. Fire emissions have almost tripled from those forests during the past 20 years, the authors of the report said.
The study attributed rising emissions from burning forests to a combination of more fire-favorable weather and faster-growing woodlands that provide flammable organic matter. Both trends are aided by rapid temperature rises in the high northern latitudes, which are warming twice as fast as the global average due to climate change.
"The steep trend towards greater extratropical forest fire emissions is a warning of the growing vulnerability of forests," said Matthew Jones, the study’s lead author and a researcher at the University of East Anglia in the U.K. "It poses a significant challenge for global targets to tackle climate change."
That’s because forests are vital to regulate Earth’s climate, absorbing about one quarter of the carbon released from human activities such as burning fossil fuels. Countries around the world also count on reforestation and afforestation to help remove more CO2 from the atmosphere — a plan that would work only if trees remain standing.
The worsening forest fire crisis comes at a time when the burning of savannas and grasslands has shrunk significantly, resulting in a roughly 25% decline in the total burnt areas by wildfires since 2001. Yet global fire emissions have not gone down, Jones and his coauthors say, because the uptake in forest fires has canceled out all the climate gains from reduced savanna and grassland fires.
Making matters worse, the researchers also found a sharp rise in forest fire severity — a measure of how much carbon is emitted per unit of area burned. This is up by nearly 50% globally.
"This signals that fires are causing much more damage to forest ecosystems than they did in the past," Jones said. "This will challenge the ability of forests to rebound — and recapture lost carbon — after fires."
And more forest fires are not just a problem for the climate. They are also putting more communities and infrastructure at risk, and pushing firefighting services to the brink. One acute case occurred this summer in Canada when a catastrophic forest fire battered the Rocky Mountain resort town of Jasper, burning down part of the Alberta community and forcing tens of thousands of people to flee for their lives.
                


https://www.japantimes.co.jp/environment/2024/10/18/wildlife/global-forest-fire-emissions-jump/


JAPAN TIMES 3 
Global warming will reach 1.5 C threshold this decade, report says
Output Browser Output


                    
LONDON –
Climate change is accelerating and the world will cross the 1.5 degrees Celsius warming threshold this decade, according to research published Thursday that scientists said should raise alarms at this year's COP28 climate talks.
Countries pledged in the 2015 Paris Agreement to try to hold global warming to within 1.5 C above preindustrial temperatures, but the new paper by a team of scientists, including from NASA and Columbia University, adds to evidence suggesting that this goal is already out of reach.
Most emissions scenarios under the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) envision the world breaching 1.5 C during the 2030s.
"The 1.5 C limit is deader than a doornail," said study co-author James Hansen of Columbia University's Earth Institute, who was among the first scientists to alert the world in the 1980s to the climate-warming impact of greenhouse gases.
"The shortcoming of our scientific community is to not make clear to the political leaders what the situation is," he said.
The world already has warmed by nearly 1.2 C above preindustrial temperatures.
The study has received mixed feedback from other climate scientists. Some questioned its findings, with Michael Mann of the University of Pennsylvania saying in a blog post that they were "very much out of the mainstream."
The new report comes after months of extreme weather shocks worldwide, from heat waves in China to severe flooding in Libya, with 2023 set to be the warmest year on record.
Countries will gather later this month in Dubai for the annual U.N. climate summit to discuss global policy efforts to rein in greenhouse gas emissions.
The study's findings, published in the journal Oxford Open Climate Change, result from two factors.
Scientists have underestimated how sensitive the Earth's climate is to rising carbon dioxide levels. The IPCC has given a best-guess estimate that the doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide levels would yield global warming of around 3 C.
A better understanding of ancient climate data — gleaned from sources such as ice cores and tree rings — has resulted in a higher estimate of around 4.8 C, the study said.
So far, atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations have risen from around 280 parts per million (ppm) in the preindustrial era to about 417 ppm today.
Another factor cited by the report relates to China's progress in cleaning up air pollution, caused mainly by sulphur dioxide spewed from coal plants, alongside global efforts to curb such emissions from shipping.
Cleaning the skies, while bringing health benefits and saving lives, accelerates climate change. Aerosols scatter and reflect solar radiation.
Pennsylvania's Mann took issue with the notion that models have underestimated climate sensitivity, as well as with the impact of declining sulphur dioxide emissions from shipping.
Others said the study was in line with other recent research.
"Everything is accelerating," said climate scientist Klaus Hubacek of the University of Gronigen.
Earlier this week, research published in the journal Nature Climate Change suggested the world would need to reach net zero emissions by 2034 for a 50% chance of containing warming to 1.5 C — far sooner than the global goal of 2050.
                


https://www.japantimes.co.jp/environment/2023/11/03/climate-change/warming-threshold-reach-study/
JAPAN TIMES 4
The true cost of the climate crisis on Japan
The prime minister has called for Japan to be carbon neutral by 2050, but bolder measures look necessary to reduce the economic damage caused by global warming.


When Yoshihide Suga declared in October that Japan would be carbon neutral by 2050, he became the first Japanese prime minister to set a specific timeline in the country’s bid to become emissions free.
As ambitious as Suga’s pledge may be, it’s far from being a pipe dream. The world is slowly taking concrete steps to address the climate crisis, and Japan simply can ill afford to sit on the sidelines any longer.
Japan is as vulnerable to climate change as any other country in the world. Its 2019 typhoon season was the costliest on record, closely followed by 2018. What’s more, scorching heat waves hospitalized thousands across the country in 2018 and 2019, while record rainfall in this period forced millions to evacuate from their homes.
“Typhoons that are supposed to (make landfall) only once in 100 years seem to be striking Japan every year,” says Soma Kondo, a spokesperson for Climate Youth Japan. “I think any more damage will have the entire country concerned about global warming.”
Many of these aspects of climate change are no longer projections, but realities. In 2018, the Environment Ministry reported that annual temperatures recorded in Japan are
rising faster
than the global average — and that the archipelago gets an extra day of “heat wave” weather once every five years. The report noted more days of heavy precipitation, fewer days of rain overall and a snow depth reduction of about 13% per decade.
It has recently become evident just how deep the consequences of climate change run in Japan, cutting deeply into the fabric of the country’s economy and society. The economic consequences of the climate crisis in Japan include storms that bring ruin to local infrastructure and businesses, and climate-related agricultural damage to pillars of regional economies and cultural pride such as rice, fresh produce and seafood.
The most dramatic consequence of the climate crisis comes in the form of increased rainfall and powerful typhoons. Annual instances of extreme precipitation in Japan have
increased by 50% since the 1970s
, and it has certainly felt that way: Between Typhoon Lan in 2017, Typhoon Jebi in 2018, Typhoon Hagibis in 2019, and torrential rain that caused millions to evacuate in western Japan in 2018 and Kyushu in 2017, 2019 and 2020, the impact has been nothing short of devastating. In 2019, damage caused by Typhoon Hagibis exceeded ¥1.8 trillion, a record for a water-caused natural disaster that wasn’t related to a tsunami. The previous record was the heavy rain recorded in Okayama and western Japan in 2018.
“Everything (is at risk),” says Miguel Esteban, a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Waseda University. “From an engineering point of view, it would probably be better to move everybody out of this country and resettle them elsewhere.”
Tropical storms form as a consequence of heat and so, generally speaking, the hotter the weather, the
more typhoons occur.
Studies
show that
global warming has increased the proportion of severe tropical storms around the world.
Rescue workers search a flooded area in the aftermath of Typhoon Hagibis, which caused severe floods at the Chikuma River in Nagano Prefecture in October 2019. | REUTERS
Most of the economic damage during such storms occurs to infrastructure and buildings. Last summer,
heavy rain in Kyushu
killed 64, forced 200,000 residents to evacuate, caused 105 rivers to overflow, 316 mudslides, and, according to Kumamoto prefecture, monetary damage of more than ¥556 billion. The area around the Kuma River was particularly hard-hit, with houses and bridges being swept away.
“Heavy rain in Kumamoto in recent years has caused major floods and landslides,” says Toshio Fujimi, a professor of engineering at Kumamoto University’s Center for Water Cycle, Marine Environment and Disaster Management. “As a result, we have seen heavy damage to major roads and agriculture by sediment flowing into farmland, as well as the destruction of dams and reservoirs.”
There is also a ripple effect on local businesses and the local economy. In November 2019, Nikkei
Asia reported that Typhoon Hagibis
had significantly disrupted the tourist season in Hakone, cutting off mountain railway services as well as spring water to hotels and inns. Fujimi anticipates that Kumamoto will suffer from the same problem, as tourists shy away from visiting disaster-struck regions.
Even the temporary suspension of a bullet train can cast a long shadow over local economies in the nearby region.
“Tourist numbers have been slow to recover, even after the bullet train resumed operation,” Tateki Ataka, president of Hokkoku Bank in Ishikawa, told Nikkei Asia after Hagibis. “It seems that tourists remain reluctant to make trips as the impact of the typhoon lingers.”
And while rising sea levels in Japan don’t pose an immediate problem to many of the country’s residents, the World Wide Fund for Nature estimates that
about ¥12 trillion will be needed
to protect infrastructure and coastlines against a 1-meter rise in sea levels. And, as if that’s not enough, replacing infrastructure that is damaged by storms every year is difficult enough without having to set financial resources aside to fight COVID-19.
“The river flood defenses in Tokyo are currently being upgraded to withstand 1-in-200-year events,” Esteban says. “Adaptation is much cheaper than leaving things vulnerable.”
In a 2016 study, Esteban and his team calculated that the cost of inaction could exceed ¥100 trillion in damage, compared to the ¥370 billion investment required to upgrade Tokyo’s infrastructure to defend the city against storm surges and rising sea levels.
The climate crisis has also already led to changes for some of Japan’s most important agricultural products — first and foremost, rice.
When growing rice, high temperatures can cause white immature grain as well as cracked grain by reducing starch production and breaking apart the husk. The Environment Ministry reported that cases of both white immature grain and cracked grain have been increasingly seen around Japan — as well as a reduction in yield in unusually warm years. As early as 2012, 25 prefectures had already reported an increase in rice grain damage.
JA Oita, the regional cooperative of farms in Oita Prefecture, says that high temperatures and irregular, but extreme, rainfall have combined to make last year extremely poor in terms of a rice yield.
“The quality of the rice has deteriorated because the night temperature does not drop due to global warming,” says Yasunori Hitomi, a representative from JA Oita. “The number of ears of rice is also decreasing because of less rainfall overall. As a result, the rice-crop index of Oita Prefecture last year was 77, compared to the national average of 98.”
Extreme heat’s effects on rice quality and yields can have knock-on business consequences. When actual shipments don’t match the projected yields, the balance of supply and demand is disrupted, causing over- or under-supply and unexpected competition between different regions.
“We haven’t been able to make shipments according to our plan, so our prices won’t rise,” Hitomi says.
Projections suggest that 30% decreases in rice yields for most of Japan outside of Hokkaido and Tohoku are possible in the next 50 years.
Rising temperatures are also having consequences on fruit. The Environment Ministry has reported that high temperatures and low summer precipitation has caused damage to grapes, apples, persimmons, oranges and peaches.
A study on apples
showed that negative effects of high temperatures have been observed in Nagano Prefecture, and predicted that the climate would be too warm to grow apples in the country by 2060. Farmers cited in the study were particularly concerned in the short-term over paler colored apples, which drastically lower prices, since the Japanese market highly values colorful fruit. Nagano farmers described earlier blooming as well as higher fall temperatures, later frosts and more hail storms — events all linked to the climate crisis.
Katsutoshi Osanai of JA Aomori says that high September and October temperatures are inhibiting the ripening of their apples and even burning the fruit.
“We haven’t seen large impacts on our vegetables yet, but the mild winter snowfalls ... (are) definitely a different climate from the old Aomori Prefecture,” Osanai says.
Storms can also bring devastation to farmers, such as when
Typhoon Hagibis caused damage totalling ¥102 billion
to crops such as rice, apples and cucumbers.
Jorge Molinos of the Arctic Research Center at Hokkaido University | COURTESY OF JORGE MOLINOS
The climate crisis is further beginning to have effects on Japan’s fisheries. Jorge Molinos, a professor at the Arctic Research Center at Hokkaido University, who studies the effects of the climate crisis on the marine ecosystem, says that climate change is causing a rapid reorganization of marine life by relocating species within warming oceans.
Japan’s unique geography puts temperate waters in contact with tropical waters. Fish are sensitive to changes in temperature, so tropical species are pushing north.
“Tropical herbivorous fish, which are arriving in increasing numbers to the temperate costs of Shikoku or Kyushu are putting extra pressure on temperate seaweed, posing a serious threat to these valuable ecosystems,” Molinos says. “The tropicalization in Japan has many faces, like the expansion of tropical coral reefs ... or the population decline of temperate species.”
Challenges for the fishing industry have emerged all over the country, from Hokkaido’s salmon, Pacific saury and squid catches to the disappearance of abalone and anchovies in Tokyo Bay. While difficult to link directly to climate change, the salmon catch has
plummeted in Hokkaido by 70%
in the past 15 years.
“The fishing industry is very concerned,” says Shinichi Ito, a professor at the Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute at Tokyo University. “Higher water temperatures are causing problems for nori and
wakame
(seaweed).”
Large-scale losses of seaweed cultivation grounds were previously observed in Kyushu and Yamaguchi Prefecture in 2013. Then, in last year’s summer, local divers and fishers in
Tokyo Bay reported the additional loss of seaweed beds.
Tropical reefs were first confirmed in Kanto waters as recently as 2007.
“With the loss of the seaweed beds, large abalone, which were our local specialty, died out,” Koichi Hirashima, head of a local fisher’s association tells Kyodo News. Hirashima says that it has also become nearly impossible to catch anchovies and cherry bass in February due to higher ocean temperatures.
Adaptation to the climate crisis is possible and already underway. Farmers around Japan have even changed crops to get by. In the Nanyo region of Ehime Prefecture,
farmers started growing Tarocco orange
, which can tolerate higher levels of summer heat. On the islands and coastal areas of Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture, farmers have
begun cultivating avocados
to cope with warmer climates. A sake brewery that operated in Nakatsugawa, Gifu, for nearly 150 years recently
relocated to Hokkaido due to global warming.
“The colder the weather is, the better the quality of sake,” Koji Yamada, president and master brewer of the company tells the Asahi Shimbun. “This is an issue we must resolve over the next 100 years.”
Naoki Kumagai, a researcher at the National Institute for Environmental Studies, says more yellowtail is being caught by fishing operators outside of southern Japan. | COURTESY OF NAOKI KUMAGAI
Hokkaido fishing operators, already suffering from poor salmon hauls and encountering inedible sunfish for the first time ever, are rapidly changing to yellowtail and even bluefin tuna in order to stay afloat.
“Yellowtail is an important fishery item mainly in southern Japan,” says Naoki Kumagai, a researcher at the National Institute for Environmental Studies. “When it started to be caught in Hokkaido, it was (worthless). Now however, yellowtail has been priced well also in Hokkaido.”
But the cultural loss cannot be quantified. The indigenous Ainu people had 133 words for salmon, the crucial ingredient in Hokkaido’s beloved sashimi rice bowl. Fishing operators can catch yellowtail instead, but what is Hokkaido without salmon?
To protect their apple trees, farmers in Nagano Prefecture delay harvests and place reflective materials on the ground. But even these measures can’t prevent severe typhoons from
wiping away entire harvests
, much like Hagibis did two years ago. Nagano Prefecture is highly prized for its apples, and currently contributes to 18% of the national harvest. What is Nagano Prefecture without apples?
Thus, the climate crisis has begun to threaten long-standing regional specialties and local culture. The prices and accessibility of fish, fruit, grain and vegetables may create consequential changes in the economic and cultural life and image of regions around Japan.
Hokkaido fishing operators, already suffering from poor salmon hauls, are rapidly changing to yellowtail and even bluefin tuna in order to stay afloat. | COURTESY OF HOKKAIDO ARCTIC RESEARCH CENTER
Climate change, with its challenges, brings opportunities for innovation. The Environment Ministry reported on the growth of agriculture support services and technologies to improve the heat tolerance of buildings.
“The past few years have seen Japan’s national resilience — green infrastructure, smart city and other initiatives — turned into platforms that specifically link national agencies, subnational governments, business and civil society,” says Andrew DeWit, a professor of economics at Rikkyo University. “These partnerships have seen growth rates of several hundred percent over the past year.”
The larger problem is that Japan’s climate policy, despite Suga’s ambitious declaration, remains in limbo. After the 1992 Kyoto Protocol, Japan’s climate strategy was based on nuclear energy. However, following the nuclear meltdowns at the Fukushima No. 1 power plant in 2011, Japan deactivated all of its nuclear reactors — and
just a handful remain in operation today
. This shift led to a decade of resurgent fossil fuel use in the 2010s. Combined with stagnation in renewable growth, Japan is far from reducing emissions targets that align with the Paris agreement’s objectives.
“Since the Environment Ministry is in charge of climate change policy, measures are limited to homes and offices, and there is no energy or transportation policy,” says Kenrou Taura, a representative from Kiko Network, a Kyoto-based climate organization. “Many of the policies have further convinced people that measures against climate change are inconvenient and inhibit economic growth.”
Activists attempt to raise awareness of climate change. | COURTESY OF KIKO NETWORK
Now, climate change itself is inhibiting economic growth, affecting infrastructure, rice, fruit, fisheries — and livelihoods — across Japan.
“We do not disregard individual efforts to be eco-friendly, but we believe there is a need for major social and economic changes,” Taura says. “We need adaptation and mitigation measures for each region, and information and educational programs to promote the participation and understanding of residents. Raising CO2 reduction targets should be given top priority.”
                
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/life/2021/01/16/environment/cost-climate-change/


KYODO NEWS 1 
Japan, U.S. to ink partnership deal on climate change                 
The Japanese and U.S. governments are arranging to sign a partnership deal on climate change when Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga meets with President Joe Biden later this month, diplomatic sources said Monday.
Tackling global warming is expected to be a focus of the April 16 meeting in Washington, along with affirming the strength of the Japan-U.S. alliance and cooperation in efforts to realize a free and open Indo-Pacific amid China's growing assertiveness in the region.
Combined photo shows U.S. President Joe Biden (R, Getty) and Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga. (Kyodo)
"I hope Japan and the United States can take the lead in tackling climate change," Suga told a parliamentary session.
The meeting comes as Biden has vowed to make climate change a top priority of his administration, reversing his predecessor Donald Trump's decision to pull out of the Paris Agreement and inviting world leaders to a virtual summit on the issue on April 22-23.
Suga said he plans to unveil Japan's new target for reducing carbon emissions by 2030 soon, and that he hopes to work with Biden to push China, the world's biggest emitter of CO2, to "do its part as a global power."
According to the sources, Suga and Biden are slated to agree to set up working groups to boost cooperation on climate change, COVID-19 measures and cutting-edge technologies.
The leaders are also set to discuss the situation in Taiwan, which the Biden administration has accused China of intimidating by military, diplomatic and economic means, the sources said, with the Japanese and U.S. governments considering whether to refer to the issue in a post-meeting joint statement.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a renegade province awaiting unification, by force if necessary, and has continued to send fighter jets and bombers into nearby airspace in recent months.
The top diplomats and defense chiefs of Japan and the United States called for peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait when they met in Tokyo last month.
"It's important that Japan and the United States cooperate to maintain deterrence and create an environment where Taiwan and China can resolve their differences peacefully," Suga said in a TV program on Sunday.
According to separate sources, the joint statement is expected to affirm the Senkaku Islands fall under the scope of Article 5 of the Japan-U.S. security treaty, which states Washington will defend territories under Tokyo's administration from armed attack.
The uninhabited islands in the East China Sea are controlled by Japan but claimed by China, which calls them Diaoyu, and frequently sends coast guard ships nearby to assert its ownership.
The meeting between Suga and Biden was initially set to take place on April 9 but was pushed back by one week as the Biden administration focuses on dealing with COVID-19.
Related coverage:
Suga to join Biden in leading efforts to tackle climate change
Suga-Biden summit pushed back to April 16: Japan spokesman
Japan mulls ending support for exporting coal-fired power plants
                


https://english.kyodonews.net/news/2021/04/c5f1c60cdc8d-japan-us-to-ink-partnership-deal-on-climate-change.html


KYODO NEWS  2 
Global warming to eclipse 1.5 C mark unless emissions plateau by 2025


                    
A U.N. climate panel warned Monday that greenhouse gas emissions must reach a peak by 2025 and head downward from there for the world to achieve a goal of limiting global temperature rise to 1.5 C above pre-industrial levels.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which provides governments with scientific information so they can come up with effective climate solutions, pointed out in the latest report by its working group that the current pace of emissions reduction is not enough.
The report updates the working group's contribution to a report released eight years ago.
The working group focuses on climate change mitigation by assessing means for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and removing such gases from the atmosphere.
Part of the report was released as the panel with 195 member states wrapped up an online general conference and working group conference that began March 21.
At last year's U.N. climate talks, called COP 26, governments reached an agreement on efforts to contain global temperature rise to 1.5 C compared with pre-industrial levels.
While the IPCC defines pre-industrial era as several centuries before large-scale industrial activities began around 1750, it uses average figures between 1850 and 1900 as pre-industrial level temperatures of the world because observation data worldwide are available for the period.
The panel had analyzed there would be a big difference in a magnitude of negative effects between limiting temperature rise to 2 C and to 1.5 C, and that in order to realize no or limited overshoot of 1.5 C, it will be necessary that global net anthropogenic CO2 emissions decline about 45 percent from 2010 levels by 2030 and reach net zero around 2050.
Moreover, it is believed that even if each country meets its reduction target, greenhouse gas emissions will still increase in 2030.
"The report calls on the whole world to further accelerate mitigation measures for climate change," Japanese Environment Minister Tsuyoshi Yamaguchi said in a statement.
Japan aims to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 46 percent by fiscal 2030 compared with fiscal 2013 levels.
The Environment Ministry said in a preliminary report that greenhouse gas emissions in the country dropped in fiscal 2020, which ended in March 2021, for the seventh consecutive year.
But global emissions have been rising on economic growth in developing nations, among other factors. China, the world's largest emitter, has expected to reach its emissions peak by 2030.
The IPCC was created in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization and the U.N. Environment Program.
                


https://english.kyodonews.net/news/2022/04/c6b3bb346cbd-global-warming-to-eclipse-15-c-mark-unless-emissions-plateau-by-2025.html


KYODO NEWS 3 
Extreme climate hits Japan, elsewhere in Asia hard in 2023: U.N
KYODO NEWS - May 4, 2024 - 10:44 | All, Japan, World




Output Browser Output


                    
Asia, including Japan, is warming faster than the global average, as the trend has nearly doubled since the 1961-1990 period and many countries in the region observed their hottest year on record in 2023, according to a U.N. weather agency.
The annual mean near-surface temperature over Asia last year was the second highest on record, particularly high from western Siberia to central Asia and from eastern China to Japan, with Japan seeing its hottest summer on record, the World Meteorological Organization said in its report released in late April.
WMO Secretary General Celeste Saluo pointed out in the report that the record-breaking weather hit the region along with a barrage of extreme conditions, ranging from droughts and heatwaves to floods and storms.
Women walk with parasols under the scorching sun in Date in Fukushima Prefecture on Aug. 5, 2023, with the mercury reaching 40.0 C in the northeastern Japanese city. (Kyodo)
"Climate change exacerbated the frequency and severity of such events, profoundly impacting societies, economies, and most importantly, human lives and the environment that we live in," Saluo said.
The report also shed light on the impact of climate change on sea surface temperatures and ocean heat.
Marine heatwaves occurred in a large area of the Arctic Ocean, in the eastern Arabian Sea and in the northern Pacific, and this lasted three to five months, the report said.
The sea surface in the areas of the Kuroshio current system, a north-flowing, warm ocean current on the west side of the North Pacific Ocean basin, as well as that in other seas, is warming more than three times faster than the global average.
Experts pointed out that global warming on oceans has contributed to the rapid shift in the geographical distribution of fish, with many of the fish relocating toward colder waters due to rising water temperatures.
In waters around Japan, significant drops in the catches of saury and Japanese common squid, for example, have been observed lately, while the northward shift of yellowtail and Japanese Spanish mackerel has been observed.
"It's possible that the rate of warming in some regions may be too fast for fish to adapt, and so relocating may be their best coping strategy," said Carolin Dahms, lead author on a separate study by the University of Glasgow.
Shaun Killen, senior author of the study, said that though relocation to cooler water may allow these species to persist in the short term, it is necessary to keep a close eye on how food webs and ecosystems will be influenced by these changes.
Related coverage:
Central Tokyo logs 28.1 C on March 31, record-high temperature for March
2023 marks Japan's hottest year on record, 1.29 C higher than average
                




nglish.kyodonews.net/news/2024/05/a0be583b27ea-extreme-climate-hits-japan-elsewhere-in-asia-hard-in-2023-un.html#:~:text=Asia%2C%20including%20Japan%2C%20is%20warming,weather%20agency


KYODO NEWS 4 
Japan set to record-high average temperature in 2024, 2nd year in row


                    
Japan's average temperature in 2024 is likely to hit a record high for the second consecutive year, preliminary figures released by the weather agency showed Wednesday.
The average temperature through November was 1.64 C warmer than the annual average for the 30-year period until 2020, hitting the highest level since the agency started releasing data in 1898 and higher than last year's, which exceeded the average by 1.29 C.
The high temperatures were due to warm air being brought in by westerlies that traveled further north than usual in addition to the effects of global warming, the Japan Meteorological Agency said.
"It can be said that temperatures were abnormally high," a weather agency official said.
Japan's temperatures have kept rising in recent years, with the five years between 2019 and 2023 dominating the top five hottest years.
In the long term, the annual average temperature has risen 1.35 C every 100 years, the agency said.
The average surface temperature of the seas around Japan was also 1.46 C higher than the annual average as of late November, surpassing a record high marked in 2023 since comparable data became available in 1908.
People walk under mist showers to cool off in the Japanese capital's sweltering weather on July 4, 2024. (Kyodo)
Related coverage:
Japan to cut 60% of emissions by FY2035, but experts call for more
Tuvalu fighting to ensure its future amid sea level rise: PM
                




https://english.kyodonews.net/news/2024/12/619452a08d5c-japan-set-to-record-high-average-temperature-in-2024-2nd-year-in-row.html?phrase=korea&words=&utm_source=chatgpt.com


THE MAINICHI 1 
European climate agency says this will likely be the hottest year on record -- again




                    
A tourist shelters from the sun by a fountain in front of the Sforzesco Castle in Milan, Italy, on July 11, 2024. (AP Photo/Luca Bruno, File)
CHICAGO (AP) -- For the second year in a row, Earth will almost certainly be the hottest it's ever been. And for the first time, the globe this year reached more than 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) of warming compared to the pre-industrial average, the European climate agency Copernicus said Thursday.
"It's this relentless nature of the warming that I think is worrying," said Carlo Buontempo, director of Copernicus.
Buontempo said the data clearly shows the planet would not see such a long sequence of record-breaking temperatures without the constant increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere driving global warming.
He cited other factors that contribute to exceptionally warm years like last year and this one. They include El Nino -- the temporary warming of parts of the Pacific that changes weather worldwide -- as well as volcanic eruptions that spew water vapor into the air and variations in energy from the sun. But he and other scientists say the long-term increase in temperatures beyond fluctuations like El Nino is a bad sign.
"A very strong El Nino event is a sneak peek into what the new normal will be about a decade from now," said Zeke Hausfather, a research scientist with the nonprofit Berkeley Earth.
News of a likely second year of record heat comes a day after U.S. Republican Donald Trump, who has called climate change a "hoax" and promised to boost oil drilling and production, was reelected to the presidency. It also comes days before the next U.N. climate conference, called COP29, is set to begin in Azerbaijan. Talks are expected to focus on how to generate trillions of dollars to help the world transition to clean energies like wind and solar and avoid more warming.
Also on Thursday, a report released by the United Nations Environment Programme called for increased funds to adapt to global heating and its consequences. It found that the $28 billion spent worldwide to adapt to climate change in 2022 -- the latest year the data is available -- is an all time high. But it's still far short of the estimated $187 to $359 billion needed every year to deal with the heat, floods, droughts and storms exacerbated by climate change.
"Earth's ablaze," said U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres in a pre-recorded statement marking the report's release. "Humanity's torching the planet and paying the price" with the vulnerable most affected, he said.
"Frankly, there is no excuse for the world not to get serious about adaptation," said UNEP's director Inger Andersen. "We need well-financed and effective adaptation that incorporates fairness and equity."
Buontempo pointed out that going over the 1.5 degree Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) threshold of warming for a single year is different than the goal adopted in the 2015 Paris Agreement. That goal was meant to try to cap warming at 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) since pre-industrial times on average, over 20 or 30 years.
A United Nations report this year said that since the mid-1800s on average, the world has already heated up 1.3 degrees Celsius (2.3 degrees Fahrenheit) -- up from previous estimates of 1.1 degrees (2 degrees Fahrenheit) or 1.2 degrees (2.2 degrees Fahrenheit). That's of concern because the U.N. says the greenhouse gas emission reduction goals of the world's nations still aren't nearly ambitious enough to keep the 1.5 degree Celsius target on track.
The target was chosen to try to stave off the worst effects of climate change on humanity, including extreme weather. "The heat waves, storm damage, and droughts that we are experiencing now are just the tip of the iceberg," said Natalie Mahowald, chair of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at Cornell University.
Going over that number in 2024 doesn't mean the overall trend line of global warming has, but "in the absence of concerted action, it soon will," said University of Pennsylvania climate scientist Michael Mann.
Stanford University climate scientist Rob Jackson put it in starker terms. "I think we have missed the 1.5 degree window," said Jackson, who chairs the Global Carbon Project, a group of scientists who track countries' carbon dioxide emissions. "There's too much warming."
Indiana state climatologist Beth Hall said she isn't surprised by the latest report from Copernicus, but emphasized that people should remember climate is a global issue beyond their local experiences with changing weather. "We tend to be siloed in our own individual world," she said. Reports like this one "are taking into account lots and lots of locations that aren't in our backyard."
Buontempo stressed the importance of global observations, bolstered by international cooperation, that allow scientists to have confidence in the new report's finding: Copernicus gets its results from billions of measurements from satellites, ships, aircraft and weather stations around the world.
He said that going over the 1.5 degree Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) benchmark this year is "psychologically important" as nations make decisions internally and approach negotiations at the annual U.N. climate change summit Nov. 11-22 in Azerbaijan.
"The decision, clearly, is ours. It's of each and every one of us. And it's the decision of our society and our policymakers as a consequence of that," he said. "But I believe these decisions are better made if they are based on evidence and facts."
                




https://mainichi.jp/english/articles/20241108/p2g/00m/0sc/016000c


THE MAINICHI  2 
News Navigator: What did UN's global warming report say, and what can Japan do?
                   
This photo taken by a Mainichi Shimbun helicopter shows a residential area in Kurashiki, Okayama Prefecture, flooded due to the torrential rain in west Japan in July 2018. (Mainichi/Tadashi Kako)
The Mainichi Shimbun answers some common questions readers may have about a report on global warming released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on March 20.
Question: What is the report about?
Answer: The report, based on IPCC's latest research, expresses concern that global temperatures will climb to 1.5 degrees Celsius above the 18th century pre-industrial average by the early 2030s if measures to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions remain unchanged. The Paris Agreement, an international treaty to prevent global warming, aims to limit the temperature rise to 1.5 C above pre-industrial levels. One of the causes of global warming is greenhouse gases such as CO2, and the report pointed out that CO2 emissions must be reduced by 60% compared to the 2019 average by 2035 to stop the rise to 1.5 C.
Q: What is the IPCC's role?
A: The IPCC was established by the United Nations in 1988 to assess the effects of global warming from multiple perspectives such as science and technology. Over 190 countries and regions belong to the IPCC, which issues reports that summarize their latest findings, including papers published by scientists around the world and observation data.
Q: What measures can be taken to prevent global warming?
A: We need to incorporate more power generation using renewable energy sources that do not emit CO2, such as solar power. It is also important to minimize the use of oil and coal, which emit CO2 when burned. Japan has declared a conditional abolition of coal-fired electricity, but it can't be said that sufficient measures are being taken.
Q: With limited time left, what is the next step?
A: The report has determined that human activities are the cause of global warming. Since global warming countermeasures will also be discussed at the Group of Seven Hiroshima summit in May, Japan is being asked to show leadership as the chairing country.
(Japanese original by Toshiyuki Suzuki, Science & Environment News Department)
                


https://mainichi.jp/english/articles/20230329/p2a/00m/0op/020000c


THE MAINICHI 3
UN weather agency: Greenhouse gases reach new record in 2021
                    
A cow walks through a field as an oil pumpjack and a flare burning off methane and other hydrocarbons stand in the background in the Permian Basin in Jal, N.M., on Oct. 14, 2021. (AP Photo/David Goldman, File)
GENEVA (AP) -- The three main greenhouse gases hit record high levels in the atmosphere last year, the U.N. weather agency said Wednesday, calling it an "ominous" sign as war in Ukraine, rising costs of food and fuel, and other worries have elbowed in on longtime concerns about global warming in recent months.
"More bad news for the planet," the World Meteorological Organization said in a statement along with its latest annual Greenhouse Gas Bulletin. It's one of several reports released in recent days looking at several aspects of humanity's struggle with climate change in the run up to the U.N.'s latest climate conference, in Sharm el-Sheikh in Egypt.
Of the three main types of heat-trapping greenhouse gases -- carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide -- the biggest jump from 2020 to 2021 was in methane, whose concentrations in the air came in with the biggest year-on-year increase since regular measurements began four decades ago, WMO said.
"The continuing rise in concentrations of the main heat-trapping gases, including the record acceleration in methane levels, shows that we are heading in the wrong direction," said WMO Secretary-General Petteri Taalas.
Methane is more potent at trapping heat than carbon dioxide, but doesn't stay in the atmosphere nearly as long as carbon dioxide and there's 200 times more carbon dioxide in the air than methane. Over a 20-year time-period, a molecule of methane traps about 81 times the heat as a molecule of carbon dioxide but over a century it goes down to trapping 28 times more heat per molecule than carbon dioxide, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Since pre-industrial times, which WMO sets at around the year 1750, CO2 concentrations in the air have increased by nearly 50% to 415.7 parts per million, with the U.S., China and Europe responsible for the bulk of emissions. Methane is up 162% to 1,908 parts per billion, and nitrous oxide -- whose human-made sources are things like biomass burning, industrial processes and fertilizer use -- is up about one-quarter to 334.5 parts per million.
Earlier on Wednesday the U.N's climate office said current pledges to cut greenhouse gas emissions put the planet on course to blow past the limit for global warming countries agreed to in the 2015 Paris climate accord.
It said its latest estimate based on 193 national emissions targets would see temperatures rise to 2.5 degrees Celsius (4.5 Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial averages by the end of the century, a full degree higher than the ambitious goal set in the Paris pact to limit warming by 1.5 C (2.7 F).
"We are still nowhere near the scale and pace of emission reductions required to put us on track toward a 1.5 degrees Celsius world," the head of the U.N. climate office, Simon Stiell, said in a statement. "To keep this goal alive, national governments need to strengthen their climate action plans now and implement them in the next eight years."
The report found that emissions will also increase by 10.6% by 2030 from 2010 levels, a slight decrease from the 13.7% estimates last year.
A report published Wednesday by Climate Action Tracker who track nations' pledges to reduce warming found that of 40 indicators for reducing emissions -- like weaning off coal, ramping up electric vehicles or reducing deforestation -- the world wasn't on track for any of them to match the levels of emissions reductions scientists say are needed to limit warming to 1.5C. Over half of the indicators showed the world is "well off track" to cutting emissions but added that promising progress has been made.
Climatologists and environmental advocates have been raising their voices for years about the impact of climate change, by pointing to vast changes in the weather in recent decades like forest fires in China and western United States, drought in the horn of Africa and unprecedented flooding in Pakistan - to name only a few.
CO2 remains the single most important greenhouse gas generated by human activity -- mainly from burning of fossil fuels and cement production -- amounting to about two-thirds of the warming effect on the climate, known as radiative forcing. Over the last decade, carbon dioxide has been responsible for about four-fifths of that warming effect.
Methane accounts for about more than one-sixth of the warming effect, said WMO. Three-fifths of methane reaches the atmosphere through the burps and farts of livestock, rice farming, use of fossil fuels, biomass burning and landfills; the rest comes from natural sources like wetlands and termites.
Rob Jackson, who heads the Global Carbon Project, suggested that the spikes in methane over the last two years were "mysterious" -- either blips related to the coronavirus pandemic, which temporary dented emissions, or a sign of "a dangerous acceleration in methane emissions from wetlands and other systems we've been worrying about for decades."
"Concentrations of methane and nitrous oxide are not just rising, they're rising faster than ever. While not losing our focus on carbon dioxide, we need to pay more attention to the 'other' greenhouse gases," he added. "Fortunately, methane is beginning to get the attention it deserves" through initiatives like the Global Methane Pledge, a capping effort supported by the U.S. and European Union, among others.
Nitrous oxide remains "mostly ignored," he added.
Taalas, who has been repeating warnings about global warming for years, says the focus should remain on CO2.
"As the top and most urgent priority, we have to slash carbon dioxide emissions which are the main driver of climate change and associated extreme weather, and which will affect climate for thousands of years through polar ice loss, ocean warming and sea level rise," he said.
NASA announced that an instrument on the International Space Station designed to look at mineral dust turned out to be a useful tool to find "super emitters" of methane from orbit. NASA shared three images showing plumes several miles long that are spewing methane.
A group of a dozen leaks from pipeline and other gas infrastructure in Turkmenistan is leaking 55 tons of methane per hour, about the same as the infamous 2015 Aliso Canyon leak, drilling in New Mexico that's spewing 18 tons per hour and a landfill in Iran that's emitting 8 tons per hour.
"We're looking in places where no one is planning to look for methane," said NASA instrument scientist Robert Green. "If it's there we'll see it."
                
https://mainichi.jp/english/articles/20221027/p2g/00m/0sc/010000c


THE MAINICHI 4 
Study: Warming already baked in will blow past climate goals


                    
This Jan. 10, 2009 file photo shows a flock of geese flying past a smokestack at the Jeffery Energy Center coal power plant near Emmitt in Kansas. (AP Photo/Charlie Riedel)
(AP) -- The amount of baked-in global warming, from carbon pollution already in the air, is enough to blow past international agreed upon goals to limit climate change, a new study finds.
But it's not game over because, while that amount of warming may be inevitable, it can be delayed for centuries if the world quickly stops emitting extra greenhouse gases from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas, the study's authors say.
For decades, scientists have talked about so-called "committed warming" or the increase in future temperature based on past carbon dioxide emissions that stay in the atmosphere for well over a century. It's like the distance a speeding car travels after the brakes are applied.
But Monday's study in the journal  Nature Climate Change calculates that a bit differently and now figures the carbon pollution already put in the air will push global temperatures to about 2.3 degrees Celsius (4.1 degrees Fahrenheit) of warming since pre-industrial times.
Previous estimates, including those accepted by international science panels, were about a degree Celsius (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit) less than that amount of committed warming.
International climate agreements set goals of limiting warming to 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) since pre-industrial times, with the more ambitious goal of limiting it to 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) added in Paris in 2015. The world has already warmed about 1.1 degrees Celsius (2 degrees Fahrenheit).
"You've got some ... global warming inertia that's going to cause the climate system to keep warming, and that's essentially what we're calculating," said study co-author Andrew Dessler, a climate scientist at Texas A&M University. "Think about the climate system like the Titanic. It's hard to turn the ship when you see the icebergs."
Dessler and colleagues at the Lawrence Livermore National Lab and Nanjing University in China calculated committed warming to take into account that the world has warmed at different rates in different places and that places that haven't warmed as fast are destined to catch up.
Places such as the Southern Ocean, surrounding Antarctica are a bit cooler, and that difference creates low-lying clouds that reflect more sun away from earth, keeping these places cooler. But this situation can't keep going indefinitely because physics dictates that cooler locations will warm up more and when they do, the clouds will dwindle and more heating will occur, Dessler said.
Previous studies were based on the cooler spots staying that way, but Dessler and colleagues say that's not likely.
Outside experts said the work is based on compelling reasoning, but want more research to show that it's true. Breakthrough Institute climate scientist Zeke Hausfather said the new work fits better with climate models than observational data.
Just because the world is bound to get more warming than international goals, that doesn't mean all is lost in the fight against global warming, said Dessler, who cautioned against what he called "climate doomers."
If the world gets to net zero carbon emissions soon, 2 degrees of global warming could be delayed enough so that it won't happen for centuries, giving society time to adapt or even come up with technological fixes, he said.
"If we don't, we're going to blow through (climate goals) in a few decades," Dessler said. "It's really the rate of warming that makes climate change so terrible. If we got a few degrees over 100,000 years, that would not be that big a deal. We can deal with that. But a few degrees over 100 years is really bad."
                


https://mainichi.jp/english/articles/20210105/p2g/00m/0in/050000c
Manila Bulletin 1 
Climate Change Impacts Severely Impede SDGs, Says ADB–UN Report


MANILA, PHILIPPINES (20 February 2024) — The impacts of climate change, including slow and sudden onset weather events, are reducing the ability of countries to meet their Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), according to a report released today by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
“The Asia and Pacific region has made steady progress in increasing food security, reducing the prevalence of malnutrition, and making improvements in health and well-being,” said ADB Managing Director General Woochong Um. “However, further gains are being hampered by multiple crises, including the increasing effects of climate change, the lingering impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the cost-of-living crisis.”
The report, People and Planet: Addressing the Interlinked Challenges of Climate Change, Poverty, and Hunger in Asia and the Pacific, notes that more frequent and severe climate-related hazards will result in reduced agricultural and labor productivity, loss of livelihoods, and human displacement. These strain socioeconomic and environmental systems, and hinder efforts to promote food security and alleviate poverty, especially for poorer countries and vulnerable communities.
There are promising solutions for the Asia and Pacific region that reflect the interlinkages between climate, poverty, and food insecurity. One example is food systems approaches that, designed properly, could support sustainable livelihoods for millions of farmers, ensure food security, and reduce the environmental and climate impacts of food production.
Current global and regional policies do not adequately support the integration of climate priorities with efforts to address poverty and hunger. There is an urgent need to develop stronger social protection systems for vulnerable people, to help tackle the underlying causes of poverty and food insecurity, and to strengthen their adaptive capacity to the impacts of climate change. Other key enabling factors for integrated action are increased knowledge and skills development, institutional capacity building, funding and investment, and multistakeholder partnerships. Regional cooperation is especially important, given the speed and scale of needed climate actions.
ADB is committed to achieving a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable Asia and the Pacific, while sustaining its efforts to eradicate extreme poverty. Established in 1966, it is owned by 68 members—49 from the region.


https://www.adb.org/news/climate-change-impacts-severely-impede-sdgs-says-adb-un-report


MANILA BULLETIN  2 
Marcos calls for unity vs climate change, global warming
BY Argyll Cyrus Geducos
Nov 21, 2023 08:49 PM
At a glance
* Marcos reminded the public of their roles to address the effects of the changing climate.
________________


President Marcos has urged Filipinos to work together to address the threat of global warming and make the country more resilient against climate change.


Marcos said this in celebration of the 16th Annual Global Warming and Climate Change Consciousness Week on Wednesday, Nov. 22.
In a pre-recorded video message, the President reminded the public of their roles to address the effects of the changing climate.
"We all have a role to play in this mission. So we must work together— take a stance in support of our planet," he said.
"Let us be involved in creating solutions to mitigate the effects of global warming and climate change," he added.
Marcos said this is part of his government's push for a new Philippines.
"Isa lamang po ang ating layunin, ang magkaroon ng isang Bagong Pilipinas na matatag sa mga pagsusubok, payapa at ligtas para sa mga mamamayan at puno ng pag-asa tungo sa magandang kinabukasan (We have one goal: to have a New Philippines which is resilient during challenges, peaceful and safe for all, and filled with hope for a bright future)," he said.
According to Marcos, the effects of climate change are becoming more evident.
"Rising temperatures, extreme weather events, and a decline in biodiversity are stark reminders of the need to quickly respond to this immediate environmental concern," he said.
"I enjoin the Climate Change Commission to effectively communicate this year's theme of unity and cooperation for a more resilient and adaptable nation," he added.




https://mb.com.ph/2023/11/22/marcos-calls-for-unity-vs-climate-change-global-warming




MANILA BULLETIN 3
Mangroves key to fighting flood, climate change
Coastal greenbelts photo exhibit launches at the National Museum of Natural History
Output Browser Output


                    
Yes, progress and development are vital for economic gain, but this should not happen at the expense of our environment. Lest we forget, mangrove forests per hectare can store up to four times more carbon than other types of forests.
During the launch of the photo exhibit “Our Coastal Greenbelts, Our National Treasure” at the National Museum of Natural History in Manila on July 16, 2024, international marine protection group Oceana sounded the alarm on the decline of mangroves by 30 to 50 percent over the past five decades.
Latest data from the DENR-Forest Management Bureau showed only 311,400 hectares of mangroves were left in 2020, prompting the need to plant and conserve them.
The opening panel to the exhibit (Photos courtesy of J. Avendaño)
Why we need mangroves
Mangroves help fight climate change through their capacity to store massive amounts of carbon. Ultimately, these trees shield coastlines by decreasing flooding and erosion risks.
“We needed greenbelts to stem the fury of Typhoon Carina, as we needed them a century ago or whenever storms started to ravage our country,” said Dr. Jurgenne Primavera, chief mangrove scientific advisor at Zoological Society of London. “For an archipelago with 7,600 islands lined by 36,000 kilometers of coastline and visited by an average of 20 typhoons yearly, we absolutely need these greenbelts of mangrove and beach forest trees.”
Dr. Primavera, who curated the photo exhibit at the National Museum, began her coastal greenbelt advocacy three decades ago with a paper published in Reviews in Fisheries Science.
Book author Gizelle Batomalaque explains the science of mangroves and nature to children.
Meanwhile, Secretary Jaime Bautista of the Department of Transportation highlighted that effective mangrove conservation needs collective action among environmental agencies, local communities, and other stakeholders, saying, "A collaborative approach ensures that transport development aligns with environmental stewardship."
Bill for coastal greenbelt and mangroves protection pushed
Oceana has urged authorities to pass urgently the National Coastal Greenbelt bill, which would establish a 100-meter wide band of mangrove and beach trees that will protect coastal communities by absorbing wave energy (storm surge) by up to 60 percent.
“We are alarmed by the continuous decimation of mangroves on the coastal areas to make way for economic activities, grossly disregarding the protection that mangrove forest areas cause to coastal communities, and the food and livelihood security that this important natural life support system brings to them,” said Oceana Vice President in the Philippines Atty. Gloria Estenzo Ramos.
Oceana urges the public to campaign for the protection of mangroves.
Protecting marine habitats, including mangroves, should be a collective fight involving not just policymakers but also citizens who must be engaged in the conservation of coastal trees.
"We also need engaged citizenry who make sure they are part of the decision-making process whether local, national, political, social, and economic levels. That is guaranteed by our 1987 Constitution no less," she added.
Oceana for biodiversity conservation
The nonprofit organization considers the government its partner as it works closely with national agencies, senators and congressional representatives, and fisheries sectors to achieve science-based management and marine habitat protection.
“Apart from the youth, academe, and non-government organizations, we are working closely with our artisanal fisherfolk and have won a good number of challenges to stop legitimizing illegal commercial fishing in municipal waters. They must be consulted on all matters that affect the municipal waters and marine habitats including mangroves, the very source of their sustenance and wellbeing,” shared Atty. Ramos.
Simply put, Oceana aims to achieve policy victories in countries that have nearly 25 percent of the world's wild marine fish catch, including the Philippines, to restore ocean abundance.
Children frolic in the mangroves. (Photo courtesy of Abner Barnuevo)
We should not glorify our resilience during typhoons and other disasters when experts have repeatedly warned about the environmental consequences of human activities. It’s our right and duty to defend our biodiversity; there's much more we can do than hope for good leadership which, unfortunately, is unlikely to come without engaged citizenry and collective action.
                


https://mb.com.ph/2024/7/26/mangroves-key-fighting-flood-climate-change




Manila Bulletin 4 
How mangroves help fight climate change
Study shows that mangrove forests absorb and store four times more carbon than other types of forests
Did you know mangroves absorb and store around four times more carbon than most tropical forests? 
A study in Nature Geoscience journal examined the carbon content of 25 mangrove forests across the Indo-Pacific region. It found that, per hectare, mangrove forests can store up to four times more carbon than other types of forests. 
Commonly known for sheltering animals and protecting communities from flooding, coastal trees also capture and store atmospheric carbon dioxide, which contributes massively to global warming.
Despite having many environmental benefits, mangrove forests continue to face threats. In 1918, the Philippines had some 450,000 hectares of thriving mangrove forests, but by 2020, latest data from the DENR-Forest Management Bureau showed only 311,400 hectares were left, prompting the need to conserve them.
How can we help? 
Philippine Space Agency (PhilSA) and DENR have created a nationwide mangrove map that guides conservation projects, coastal management, and scientific research to help preserve mangrove forests. 
“Amid the climate emergency and destruction of mangroves, everyone has the ability to make a difference by tracking and protecting our natural resources,” said DENR Secretary Maria Antonia Yulo-Loyzaga. 
The department seeks public help in mapping mangroves across the country. To help, take photos of mangrove areas, submit them through the app, and contribute to verifying satellite data for the National Mangrove Map. 
“Using satellite imagery and spaceborne data, we can develop the methodologies and algorithms to make more frequent and timely monitoring possible, and ultimately this should be directed toward supporting more sound decision-making and policies,” explained PhilSA Director General Joel Joseph Marciano Jr. 
Protecting coastal trees is a win-win for us humans and the environment. As the International Day for Biological Diversity draws near, it's vital to acknowledge the importance of planting and, ultimately, conserving mangrove ecosystems that help fight climate change.




https://mb.com.ph/2024/5/17/how-mangroves-help-battle-climate-change
The Moscow Times 1 
How Will Russia's Regions Bear the Brunt of Climate Crisis?


Output Browser Output


                    
Russia’s regions stand to experience the effects of climate change in diverse ways, with some hit much harder than others, according to a recent
study
co-authored by Moscow-based climatologist Alexander Chernokulsky and economist Igor Makarov.
As manmade global warming progresses —
with 2023
marking
the warmest year ever recorded — Russia may soon find itself in the midst of multiple climate change-fueled crises.
“A typical scene in Vorkuta or Noyabrsk is [seeing] cracks in the walls of houses,” one Russian climate expert told The Moscow Times, recalling visits to permafrost-covered regions in the north.
The expert requested anonymity due to their affiliation with a group that has been targeted by the Russian authorities.
“One of the most memorable examples is a residential high-rise in Noyabrsk [a city of 100,000 inhabitants in the Yamal-Nenets autonomous district], or rather what's left of it, as the building was simply demolished due to it becoming too dangerous to live in,” they said.
Russia is already experiencing intensifying droughts, floods, hot spells and accelerated permafrost thaw across its vast territory, whose climatic conditions range from subtropical to Arctic.
After assessing four major risks — heat waves, water stress, wildfires and permafrost melting — the study’s authors ranked Russia’s regions according to which will suffer the heaviest economic toll — and where early adaptation is most needed.
High forecast
Many Russians still recall the heatwave of summer 2010, which was one of the
deadliest
in the country’s history with 56,000 victims across Moscow and its surrounding region. During that time, heavy smog from wildfires
enveloped
the capital and made climate change a tangible hazard for Muscovites.
In a warming world, such periods of abnormally high temperatures — which
increase
the population’s mortality rate — will become more common and intense in Russia.
The researchers examined the projected number of extremely hot days (with maximum temperatures exceeding 35 degrees Celsius) and tropical nights (with minimum temperatures above 20 C) for Russia in the future and concluded that extreme heatwaves will pose the greatest threat to urbanized areas in the center and south of European Russia, as well as to the south of the Urals and of western Siberia.
If global greenhouse gas emissions continue as usual with no efforts to curb them, Russia’s southern regions — Krasnodar, Rostov, Stavropol, Astrakhan and Kalmykia — could
endure
an additional 13 to 26 extremely hot days on average by mid-century (2040-2059).
If the world takes minimal action to reduce emissions, the same regions would see eight to 20 deadly heat days.
Similarly, moderate climate action will see tropical nights across Russia’s south, with the above-mentioned regions experiencing 25-30 more nights with temperatures above 20 C annually by mid-century.
Without mitigation efforts, tropical nights could reach Russia’s polar tips including the republics of Komi and Karelia as well as the Arkhangelsk region.
That would result in more deaths from excessive heat, disproportionately affecting the elderly, individuals with chronic illnesses and those living below the poverty line, the study noted.
The health risks tied to abnormal warmth will be greater in the presence of wildfire smoke — a significant risk for regions in Russia’s forest belt, from its central European regions to central Siberia and the south of the Far East, the study found.
While the worst-case emissions scenario is less likely, a path
resulting
in about 3.6 C of warming by the end of the century is “quite possible,” study co-author Chernokulsky, a climatologist and the acting deputy director at the Obukhov Institute of Atmospheric Physics, told The Moscow Times.
“Is it possible to adapt? To some extent, yes, but some losses are unavoidable, no matter how you adapt,” he said. “Our task is to minimize losses, that is, to adapt nonetheless.”
A costly future
The crop-producing republics of
Chuvashia
and
Tatarstan
, as well as the
Omsk
region, declared a state of emergency in 2023 due to a drought that destroyed seedings.
Despite a
rise
in annual precipitation in the country in general, some southern regions
witnessed
a 25% decrease in summer rainfall from 1976 to 2022.
Climate-induced water stress will strike precisely those regions that are currently the most fertile, like Chernozem, the “Black Earth” region of central and southern Russia, the study found.
Major grain-producing regions such as the Rostov, Krasnodar and Stavropol regions, which already face water shortages, are likely to see worsening conditions due to climate change.
The southern regions of the Urals and western Siberia also stand to lose the most economically from water stress, the researchers said, warning that ignoring climate risks poses a threat to Russia’s food security.
The anonymous climate expert said Tatarstan as well as the Voronezh and Volgograd regions are particularly prone to water scarcity risks, which they observed during trips there in drought years.
"The pictures that are in front of my eyes are conversations with farmers in Tatarstan who showed dried-up wells and talked about how they are forced to slaughter their livestock because there's simply nothing to feed them," they said.
Moreover, the researchers found that the Moscow, Voronezh and Chelyabinsk regions are likely to be simultaneously impacted by three “climate hazards”
—
abnormal heat, water stress and wildfires
.
“
It is highly likely that if adaptation measures are not implemented, these regions will experience the greatest losses in terms of both population and economy due to climate change,” the study said.
In addition to the risks outlined in the study, Russia is
witnessing
a surge in extreme weather events. Central Russia and southwestern Siberia are facing more frequent downpours and storms, while the Black Sea coast is experiencing increasingly tropical rainfall as the sea’s temperature rises.
Russia’s largest bank Sberbank
said
the country’s annual economic damages
from climate change
could reach up to 580 billion rubles ($6.7 billion) from 2023 to 2027
, a figure
comparable
to the damages from the September 2023 Morocco earthquake.
Higher estimates
suggest
losses of 1-2% of Russia’s GDP per year until 2030, with potential economic damage in climate-exposed regions
reaching
5-6% of their gross product.
In the Yamal-Nenets autonomous district, whose inhabitants are already observing the alarming effects of the climate crisis firsthand, local authorities currently
spend
tens of millions of rubles annually on cooling systems beneath buildings to prevent their collapse due to melting soil.
But many Russian regions have not yet taken steps to prepare for the impending reality of a dangerously warmer world.
Adapting to the inevitable
The notion that Russia can benefit from climate change has circulated in the country for decades. President Vladimir Putin famously
joked
in 2003 that Russians would not need to buy as many fur coats on a warmer planet.
A recent
report
from the Russian Agency for Strategic Initiatives suggests positive aspects of climate change such as prolonged navigation along major rivers and increased economic value of Russia's abundant natural resources like water, forests and soil.
Still, in its climate doctrine last
updated
in October, Russia recognized climate change as a threat to national security and acknowledged the need for timely adaptation to the "inevitable" climate change in the coming decades.
Some regions have already
rolled out
adaptation programs, utilizing new equipment for monitoring wildfire hazards in the Irkutsk region or expanding heat-tolerant plant cultivation in annexed Crimea.
Existing adaptation efforts nonetheless fall short of what is needed, experts told The Moscow Times.
For permafrost melt, the quality of adaptation programs varies widely from region to region, said Nikita Tananaev, laboratory director at North-Eastern Federal University and lead researcher at the Melnikov Permafrost Institute in Yakutsk.
Some plans lack specific measures, consisting only of “discussions, meetings and data updates.”
“There are regional adaptation plans where it's a complete mess, as in Yakutia, and in some places, they are better, such as in the Murmansk region. However, creating a plan and implementing it are different things,” Tananaev said.
The awareness of the need for adaptation only recently came to Russia, with the corresponding government decree
adopted
in 2019, an anonymous expert said.
“By that time, the European part of the country had already experienced the nightmare of the 2010 heatwave, the loss of tens of millions of hectares of forests due to fires from 2010 to 2019, and so on,” they said.
“But the fact that such a decree [of 2019] and such a ranking [of regions] appeared … indicates that there is a chance that adaptation will still take place at a level that is possible with current technologies.”
A Message from The Moscow Times:
Dear readers,
We are facing unprecedented challenges. Russia's Prosecutor General's Office has designated The Moscow Times as an "undesirable" organization, criminalizing our work and putting our staff at risk of prosecution. This follows our earlier unjust labeling as a "foreign agent."
These actions are direct attempts to silence independent journalism in Russia. The authorities claim our work "discredits the decisions of the Russian leadership." We see things differently: we strive to provide accurate, unbiased reporting on Russia.
We, the journalists of The Moscow Times, refuse to be silenced. But to continue our work,
we need your help
.
Your support, no matter how small, makes a world of difference. If you can, please support us monthly starting from just
$
2.
It's quick to set up, and every contribution makes a significant impact.
By supporting The Moscow Times, you're defending open, independent journalism in the face of repression. Thank you for standing with us.
Continue
Not ready to support today?
Remind me later
.
                


https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2024/01/26/how-will-russias-regions-bear-the-brunt-of-climate-crisis-a83865


The Moscow Times 2
Why Is Climate Change Not on the Agenda in Russia?
                    
Russia, one of the world's top emitters of greenhouse gases, is already feeling the impacts of climate change. But compared to Western countries, where concerns about the climate crisis are widespread, this topic is nearly invisible in Russian media, politics and education.
In this episode, we decided to find out how Russian society views climate change and the factors that cause many Russians to ignore environmental issues. Climate activist Arshak Makichyan and climate scientist Alexei Kokorin join us to discuss.
For more information about climate denial and skepticism in Russia, check our
recent report
.
Russia on the Record is a podcast where Moscow Times journalists, independent experts and ordinary Russians reflect, analyze and explain what’s going on in Russia right now. You can listen to us on the following platforms:
Apple Podcasts
Spotify
Amazon Music
Google Podcasts
YouTube
A transcript of the podcast audio, which has been lightly edited for clarity, can be found below:
MT:
Welcome to the latest episode of Russia on the Record, a podcast from The Moscow Times. In this episode, we will discuss the attitudes towards climate change in Russia. Officially, the country, which is among the top emitters of greenhouse gases, is a signatory to the Paris climate agreement. However, at the government level and in educational institutions, there is almost no discussion of the climate crisis. Moreover, Russian propaganda sometimes casts doubt on the very existence of climate change. Environmental activists have been one of the few groups to manage to draw attention to this problem in Russia, but as protest activity has been suppressed, their voices have been slowly silenced. Arshak Makichyan, a prominent Russian eco-activist, was forced to leave Russia in 2022. We spoke to him about climate activism and Russians’ attitudes towards climate change.
MT:
Arshak, when and why did you start engaging in environmental activism in Russia? And who is your role model?
Arshak Makichyan:
I started to protest in March of 2019. I was inspired by, actually, Boris Nemtsov, because it was 2019 and he was killed some years before that. I went to my first protest, it was a political protest. And I thought, okay, I should do something. Also, I read about Greta Thunberg’s strike. Before that, I didn't know anything about the climate crisis, but I was kind of surprised that there is also a global crisis and we didn't know anything about it in Russia. There was no information about it in Russian media or even Russian environmental NGOs. I was kind of trying to figure out what the climate crisis is, and then I found out that it's a big deal and I started to protest.
MT:
What slogans did you use as an activist and why?
AM:
I used a lot of different kinds of slogans at first. It was, of course, like global warming is hunger, war, and death. I was trying to find the right words to describe the climate crisis to the Russian audience because in Russia the situation with climate activism was completely different from European experiences because in Russia we didn't have any knowledge about the climate crisis in society in 2019. It was getting better because we were having a lot of environmental catastrophes and all of them were connected to the climate crisis. And also, we were organizing the movement and it was quite successful even though it was a small climate movement. And we did a lot of great work before Russia started the war in Ukraine. After that, I was using mostly slogans about the war because it's also connected to the climate crisis, of course.
MT:
You mentioned that there were not many discussions about climate change in Russia. Was it difficult to find like-minded people in Russia who wished to protest for climate action?
AM:
Climate activism in Russia was completely different. We didn't have any climate knowledge in society and also people were afraid to protest, especially people from environmental backgrounds, because we had some political protests before 2019, of course, but most of the environmental activists were not politically engaged and they were thinking, ‘Oh, we can change our habits and we can do something on a personal level.’ But the idea of the climate crisis was that it's something so huge that you cannot fight against it just by changing stuff on a personal level. So we were demanding systematic changes on a political level. The first weeks I was protesting a lot, for a lot of weeks, and then other people started to text me. But the problem was that it was really scary to protest in Russia, even back in 2019, when we had so much more freedom back then. So yeah, it was difficult to find people. And then we started to organize a movement and we had a lot of different kinds of protests because the government was refusing to allow us to protest together. It's quite scary to protest alone when you are marching in crowds and you can shout and you feel these like-minded people, you are not alone, it's cool. But in Russia, it was not cool at all.
MT:
I see. And how do you generally assess Russians' attitude towards climate change? How many people recognize it as a real problem?
AM:
Before the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the situation was actually getting much better because the climate crisis is happening in Russia. I would say that the problem in Russia is that most of the media resources are kind of concentrated in Moscow and in other big cities like St. Petersburg. And most of the Russian people actually don't know what is happening in Russia. For example, I went to Kemerovo oblast, and in Kemerovo oblast, we have a lot of coal mines, and the environmental situation there is terrible. And also in the republic of Sakha, permafrost is melting and the climate crisis is affecting people's lives. But most Russian people don't know about it. And also on an international level, there is no knowledge about what is happening in Russia. Russia is a huge country. In some regions, we have desertification. In some regions, permafrost is melting, but there is no knowledge because Russia is a dictatorship. So people, especially on the regional level, are afraid to speak up about environmental problems. Now the situation is different because now we have the war in Ukraine and people are trying to survive. They are trying to escape mobilization. They are trying to do their best in some ways not to die. And so they don't have the resources to think about the climate crisis. But it's happening. For example, now we in Russia have more environmental protests than political protests because the environmental crisis continues and you can see environmental problems from your window. So a lot of people are continuing to protest, but there are people in the West, who actually don't know that people still can protest in Russia. And yeah, Russia is a dictatorship, but people still do protest and they are fighting against the destruction of nature in Russia, even though most of them cannot afford to protest against the war in Ukraine because the price for protesting against the war in Ukraine is much higher.
MT:
So if I can sum up the problem with climate activism and environmental activism in Russia back in 2019 and 2021, the problem was that Russia is very centralized and the most active cities like St. Petersburg, Moscow and other cities with a population of several million people, they are not aware of the problems of the distant regions. So if they protest, the protest is concentrated on the problems of their cities, and this extreme centralization and the huge territory of Russia make these protests a reason for low climate change awareness of Russians.
AM:
Yeah, but also we tried to organize a lot of solidarity campaigns. For example, in 2020 in Krasnoyarsk, they had a black sky mode. It's when, because of the coal burning, it's impossible to go out on the streets. We protested, we organized some small protests in different cities in Russia, we organized a solidarity campaign and Greta Thunberg retweeted it. Then we had a lot of reaction from the media and even the local government responded to our protests. So it's possible to influence the situation even in an authoritarian regime. Of course, it's different in dictatorship. For example, now we are having a lot of more radical actions because, probably, openly opposing the government now, like protesting with posters, it's not that effective. Now we have a partisanship movement, but it's of course a completely different story.
MT:
In your opinion, why are there so many climate skeptics in Russia?
AM:
I wouldn't say that there are a lot of them. There are climate skeptics everywhere, actually, and most of them are financed by the fossil fuel industry. In Russia, the fossil fuel industry is huge. And also in Russia, we also have a problem with independent media. Most of them were prosecuted, declared foreign agents and now they are working from abroad, which is also a problem, of course. They don't actually know what is happening in Russia and they are not connected to these environmental problems in the republics in Russia or in the regions in Russia. And also most of the independent media are kind of writing more about human rights violations because they don't have any expertise in environmental problems, it's also a problem.
AM:
And, yeah, it's about propaganda, Russian propaganda denies the climate crisis. They say, ‘No, it's global warming, tomorrow we will have global cooling.’ The problem is that most of the people in Russia just hear these stories from Russian propaganda. They see that the climate is changing. They see that we are having more wildfires, we are having heating quite often. We are having more environmental catastrophes. Most of them are connected to the climate crisis, but they don't have any access to information about the climate crisis. And the climate crisis is quite a complex thing, it's quite difficult to understand. And especially now, when most of the environmental NGOs are also declared foreign agents, undesirable organizations, and they cannot continue to operate in Russia.
MT:
Do the authorities benefit from ignoring the problem of climate change and making Russians doubt whether it exists at all?
AM:
They earn a lot of money from selling fossil fuels to a lot of countries. Actually, they get money for this war from selling fossil fuels. It's another side of the story that Europe and the world are financing this war, actually. And it's a huge problem. I was demanding an embargo on Russian fossil fuels when the war started and also before the war, because before the war, they were using this money to repress the Russian people, to repress the media, repress human rights defenders. So all of that is connected. The Russian government, they don't think about the future. They don't think, ‘Oh, probably in the future, the world won't be buying fossil fuels from Russia,’ because in the world, we are having different kinds of processes, like the energy transition and stuff like that. And in Russia, most people just don't know anything about renewable energy. They don't know that the world is changing, economies are changing, and it's a huge problem for us. Even if we will have regime changes in Russia, we will have a lot of economic consequences of these policies because they don't have any strategy for the future. They don't understand what is happening in the world.
MT:
You were an environmental activist in Russia for several years. What are the biggest results and achievements you've had as an environmental activist?
AM:
We organized the first climate movement. Now, climate awareness in Russia is much bigger, but our biggest achievement is when the war started, we opposed the war, we posted statements, and together with all Fridays for Future branches from all around the world, we stood up against the war. It was a huge solidarity campaign with the Ukrainian people against this terrible war. I think that we showed the world how much the climate crisis is connected to the human rights crisis. If you don't have human rights, you cannot protest for climate action or for anything. I was stripped of my citizenship. My family was deported exactly for my activism, and that means that my activism was very effective. It's kind of strange and kind of sad that my achievements were not that we achieved some policy changes in Russia.
AM:
But I do believe that in the future when Russia will be free, we will be able to have real climate policies because now I have the trust of Russian people because I did a lot of important things on many other different levels. So for me, it's also important to do other kinds of activism. I think we have achieved a lot, but we still have a lot of work to do.
AM:
For example, we recently posted on our social media about the situation, the environmental catastrophe, which is happening in the Sakha republic, in Yakutia. Most of the Russian people just don't know what is happening in our different republics in the Russian Federation. I think we still have a lot of work to do, to connect more with anti-colonial movements, to mobilize people in the regions, in the republics.
AM:
I think the environmental topic is very important because the Russian government can say, ‘Feminism is a Western theory, we don't need feminism because we have traditional values,’ and stuff like that. They cannot say, ‘We don't need the environment, because it's something that the Western countries are trying to promote in Russia,’ because Russian people care about the environment. And we have a lot of proof of that. So I think it's very important also to use environmental topics to politicize Russian people because Russia doesn't have any real policies about climate adaptation. They don't have any real climate policies or anything else [such as] environmental restrictions for corporations. So the situation is getting worse. It will be much worse in the coming years. We need to politicize the environmental movement to connect the dots in people's minds between this huge political crisis which is unfolding in Russia, and the environmental crisis.
MT:
You mentioned that you and your family were stripped of your Russian citizenship, although you moved here as a child and lived in Russia your entire adult life. Why is the Russian government so afraid of environmental activists?
AM:
I think because I was speaking up against the war and connecting the dots between the environmental crisis and the political crisis. I was trying to politicize the environmental movement in Russia. The environmental movement in Russia is huge. There are a lot of people who are concerned about what is happening with our forests, with our lakes, seas, and everything else. So I was trying to do that because it was obvious to me that we had a terrible regime in Russia. They were violating all our possible rights. This case against me was also a racist case because I'm Armenian by ethnicity. They were trying to use this against me, like, ‘Oh, you are even not Russian. You don't have this right to speak up about anything because you are not Russian.’ They were trying to use it against me. But I actually used the case against me against them, because after the beginning of this case, I was having a lot of interviews. I was speaking about Russian racism, about Russian nationalism, about Russian oppression. We as activists, we always can fight against this kind of stuff, even if we live abroad. We still have a lot of instruments, and we still have the truth behind us. I fled from Russia not because I was afraid, but because I thought it probably would be more effective to continue my work when I am free, when I can use my social media, when I can use all other kinds of different instruments that we are trying to create and to evolve. I think it's not about them being afraid of me, but it's about using terror as an instrument, a political instrument. And I was trying to oppose that. I was trying to mobilize minorities in Russia. I was trying to mobilize Armenian people in Russia, environmental activists, and that's exactly the thing we should continue to do because the war in Ukraine continues. All crises continue in Russia as well. A lot of people die, and we don't have any choice to give up and say, ‘Okay, they won.’
MT:
You left Russia in 2022. How do you and your fellow climate activists continue to pursue your activism from outside the country? And is their environmental agenda still relevant to Russians after February 2022?
AM:
The environmental agenda is very relevant. As I said, Russian propaganda is doing a lot of work in environmental propaganda. And the problem for the Russian anti-war movement is that they don't know much about environmental issues. It's a huge problem, because most of the normal Russian people in Russia, they are concerned about the environmental crisis. But most of the political activists don't know anything about climate. They think, ‘We need to define human rights, we need to donate to Ukraine.’ All this is very important. But we also need to speak about stuff that is important for Russian people who are continuing to live in Russia, because we need to oppose Russian propaganda. We need to use these topics against them because they are failing the Russian people in every aspect of life. So we need to speak up about the environmental crisis as well because it's happening and it's very important for all Russian people and the Russian government is failing all of us.
MT: We now speak with climate scientist Alexei Kokorin about climate skepticism within the Russian scientific community.
MT:
Which regions of Russia are feeling the effects of climate change the most? Probably some regions in particular that you may name where it is the most noticeable.
Alexei Kokorin:
It's a common question. Just recently, the
Russian Academy Institute of Global Climate and Ecology
specially studied it and presented to everybody — to government, to business, to the general public — that they identified four areas and number one is not the Arctic and Far East. Number one is the south of the European part of the country because they ranked it according to human health, human well-being and agriculture.
AK:
It looks reasonable because big business everywhere has a lot of resources for adaptation, but regular people do not. Therefore, the metric of well-being and agriculture looks very reasonable. According to this metric, more frequent, more long, and more severe heat waves and droughts in the south of the European part of Russia is the main factor affecting many millions of people or maybe dozens of millions of people. Number two is the Far East. It's well-known.
Monsoon climate, precipitation, floods.
Number three is the Arctic. Sure, climate change in the Arctic is the largest. Largest, of course, and sharpest. However, the number of people is very small. Native indigenous people are very adaptive. So-called Europeans mainly disappeared from the Arctic [except for] some workers of the largest oil, gas, and mineral companies, it's usually young and healthy people who can survive everywhere. Therefore, the Arctic is only number three. And number four, which is probably number one, is megalopolises. Because any megalopolis is an area of risk. The 20 million people of the megalopolis of Moscow or even 5 million of St. Petersburg or 2 million in Yekaterinburg. It's all a megalopolis. In a megalopolis, a heat wave is significantly worse for people, for human health, than in some rural areas. Therefore, on the whole Russian territory, megalopolises are also an area of risk.
MT: You mentioned that indigenous people are very adaptive to climate change. So how do they adapt and why is it more difficult for the residents of urban areas to change their lifestyles because of the climate changes?
AK:
I mentioned indigenous people in the Arctic. In the Arctic, the variation of temperatures, variation of weather conditions, was always very large. Therefore, native Nenets, Yakutians or Chukchi people used to live in large variations of different climate conditions. And style of life and traditional knowledge allow them to be very adaptive. Speaking about megapolises, adaptation is a very difficult task, particularly for people with many diseases and old people. Medical doctors speak about so-called non-timely mortality. It doesn't mean that somebody dies due to a heat wave or some climate or weather event, but the duration of his or her life becomes shorter. Maybe by only one year or three years, but anyway shorter. It’s a very serious problem.
MT:
And what measures should be introduced to slow down the changes? Are those measures introduced in Russia right now?
AK:
When we speak about Russia, it's very difficult to construct any theory of future steps. However, there are one or two very simplifying factors. There are at least two absolutely evident tasks that have to be implemented in Russia. Number one is energy efficiency and energy saving. Nothing new. The minister of economy repeated it five years ago, 10 years ago, 15 years ago, 20 years ago. So, Russia has to implement its own plans for energy efficiency and energy saving. Any wording on climate is not required — just implement it at last. The second is forest fires. Also, nothing new. Again, Russia should implement its own plans for the mitigation of forest fires. Let's suggest by 2030. If successful, it will be a significant reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. After that, we could sit down again and think what will be next steps. I don't appeal now for massive renewable energy. It's clear that it's impossible now. It's not timely now. But fortunately or unfortunately, Russia has two huge gaps which should be closed. Two tasks: forest fires and energy efficiency. After that, in 10 years in the future, we will discuss this here again and plan what is next: renewables or maybe some other things, I don't know.
MT:
To what extent is Russia aware of the seriousness of climate change and its consequences both in the scientific community and at the government level?
AK:
The scientific community is not even, because if you speak about professional climatologists, a climatologist is not a geographer. A climatologist is a specialist in the physics of the atmosphere and ocean because its measurement measures from satellites, from the ground, a combination of all factors. Of course, he or she should be only a specialist in the chemistry of the atmosphere and ocean, etc., etc. And all these people have absolutely the same opinion, that this is a very serious problem and adaptation is required, serious adaptation is required and required now. All of them understand and there is no skepticism and no disagreement about the reasons for climate change, about the scenario. Of course, there are a lot of uncertainties, in particular, relating to clouds or maybe permafrost melting. Anyway, it's secondary. The basic things are the common opinion of all climatologists and they understand that now serious greenhouse gas emission [reductions] in Russia looks non-timely. Energy efficiency and forest fires are another matter. It's not necessary to appeal for that. Therefore, these scientists speak about urgent adaptation. Medical doctors support them completely. In some regions, people are quite well educated and understand the problem, and are ready for serious adaptation. In other regions, in particular, in the middle of Russia, the governments of the regions don't see real and dangerous signals because they are not the Far East, they are not the south, they are not the Arctic, they are not a megapolis. So as a result, they are quite relaxed, yeah? But anyway, adaptation is required. However, there are some other scientists who are not climatologists, but they could be philosophers or economists. They pay attention mainly to money. And in many cases, they have a very skeptical view of the necessity of Russia to reduce emissions. Moreover, in the current economic and geopolitical conditions, this looks like something non-timely. Therefore, summarizing all of that, it's possible to say that a professional climate society of climatologists exists in Russia, it’s small but it exists. They have absolutely clear and certain scientific opinions. They appeal for urgent adaptation. And in 10 years in the future, I hope we will be able to undertake more.
MT:
You said that Russian society is not very homogeneous in its attitudes toward climate change. So, how successful are they in explaining and informing Russians about the consequences of climate change?
AK:
It's trying to do the best. The general public has no direct access to science through media. Frankly speaking, Russian media, which informs about the physical basis of climate change, is better than years ago or even five years ago. So, the message from the media now is 70-80% quite correct — that yes, this is anthropogenic, this is dangerous. It's not global flooding. It's not global fire. But it's really serious. It's scientifically based. Adaptation is required. Just a transition in energy is also required. Not immediately, but in 50 years, but required. So, all is correct. However, they have two serious problems. One is the older generation of Russian society does not trust in anything. They trust in nothing. Absolutely nothing. They have the experience of the Soviet Union. They have the experience of modern Russia. Therefore, they do not listen to science. They do not listen to the media at all.
AK:
So they have a so-called skeptical opposition of people who are around my age, almost 65 or older. It's not a big problem, to be honest. The big problem is the second problem, the absence of climate change consideration in schools. In the school curriculum, there is only minimal information about climate change. And this information is very non-structured. It looks like some puzzle, some mixture of something unclear with unclear. Therefore, school people and teachers have no clear knowledge about what climate change is. I mean just physical, not economic geography. So in the course of physical geography, in what is probably the seventh grade of regular school, children obtain a lot of information about cyclones, anticyclones, some very complicated atmospheric events — with maybe 1% of this remaining in their memory, not more — and almost nothing about climate change. It's really bad. Anyway, I see that the younger generation of Russian people, who look at not only the first program of Russian television or school [textbooks], but the internet around the globe, different sites. They are quite good at understanding climate change. Anyway, it's clear that climate change is not problem number one in Russia now. Number one is the problem which you know even better than me, I hope: climate change is now in the shadow of this very large problem. Therefore, I don't think that it's possible to achieve significant progress in Russia in the near future, in the 2020s. Therefore, I think that it's better to appeal to people, to business, and to government officials to improve the situation of energy efficiency and forest fires, even without mentioning the climate effect of these very big tasks.
MT:
And how do government officials benefit from making Russians doubt the reality of climate change? Because you mentioned that there is no specific education about it.
AK:
Russian officials, probably all ministries, are too busy and too overloaded with problems, which you know. Therefore, they don't think about the climate at all. Many of them are quite familiar with the problem without any skepticism, with a clear understanding that the energy transition will be necessary, adaptation will be necessary. But they are too busy to sort out problems with export, import, oil, gas, coal, minerals, computers, everything.
MT:
You mean that they are more concentrated on adapting to the extreme conditions in the Russian economy, to the extreme circumstances?
AK:
Yeah, yeah. Of course, the problem is not completely forgotten. Maybe mitigation of greenhouse gas emission reduction is temporarily forgotten. But adaptation is not forgotten. And therefore, in many regions, they have a real intention for adaptation. They see the clear impact signals, losses in the economy, and even losses in life. And therefore, they do agree, they want to go ahead. Some regions have their own money, like Moscow, or Yamal-Nenets Okrug, or Khanty-Mansiysk, Khabarovsk Krai, or Primorsky Krai. Some others have no money, they are not so rich, but they try to do their best anyway.
MT:
And if we compare Russia with its neighboring countries, especially in the post-Soviet space, how high is the level of understanding of the consequences of climate change there, and what measures are being taken to prevent them?
AK:
The closest country is Belarus. I was in Belarus several times, not last year, but in the last 10 years, I went more than five times. And people there are significantly more familiar with climate change than Russians. Significantly better. Teachers, schoolchildren, government officials. So at least by level of awareness, Belarus significantly overruns Russia. They are quite serious, they understand that the fate of their forests depends on climate change. Agriculture also depends on climate change. It looks like Belarus is a country without fossil fuel, without some rich mineral resources. But based on agriculture, and forestry to a large extent, they have significantly larger concerns about climate change, about adaptation, about the future. This is about Belarus.
AK:
Unfortunately, after that, I know Armenia a bit. Armenia has a very serious problem, a shortage of water. And the prognoses for Armenia are really very bad because there will be a larger shortage of water and a shortage of not only groundwater but smaller, smaller precipitation from the sky. You know that Armenia has many other problems now, but anyway, people understand that. People hope that the Armenian diaspora around the globe will help in the future climate situation. They have great concern, and if I could rank post-Soviet countries on the impact or potential future impact of climate change, unfortunately, Armenia would be the number one most vulnerable country. And in the coming conference in Dubai, I hope to be there. I will speak about that and appeal to global society to pay attention just to Armenia — not to Russia, not to Belarus, but Armenia — because it's a really weak country now. Unfortunately, it’s a rather poor country and very vulnerable. Five others is Central Asia. Now I do a lot for Central Asia. I am a consultant. I'm retired, but simultaneously I'm a consultant of the Regional Environmental Center for Central Asia and working on a project with two components. One is adaptation, and the second is the participation of all people of these five countries, — by all people I mean government officials, NGO, media, business — in the UNFCCC process and Paris Agreement implementation. And I also could confirm that concern and awareness on climate change in all these five countries are quite large, quite serious. I met only a few skeptics. So, if Russia looks like some reserve of skeptics, a global reserve for skeptics, Central Asia is absolutely a forbidden zone for skeptics. All people and children and everybody are quite familiar with climate change, they understand that droughts and high temperatures and the shrinking of glaciers are big problems for Central Asia.
AK:
As a whole, the prognosis for Central Asia is significantly better than for Armenia. I mean that, according to the prognosis, the amount of precipitation will be the same as now. The problem is not the existence of water. The problem is the storage of water. How to use this water in summer? Glaciers are an accumulator of water. If your accumulator is smaller, you will need a huge flux in spring, and then nothing. Therefore, they try to construct some reservoirs and try to change traditional agriculture to more modern agriculture, [using] other agriculture species, even in other animals. So a lot of things are required there. And I hope that Central Asia will be able to avoid disaster because we are quite active now.
MT:
What immediate measures should be taken in Russia to slow down climate change? You mentioned the climate, probably something should be done in climate change education in Russia.
AK:
According to my experience, media in Russia is only limited to the so-called physical basis of climate change, nothing more. Media doesn't intervene in school education, because school education is considered a very political issue. Now there are some new things in school courses which are political, some accents in Russian history. Therefore, the media try to keep themselves out of this dangerous topic of school education. There’s no influence. Anyway, it's already not so bad that Russian media doesn't follow skeptics on the physical basis. They frequently follow skeptics in carbon regulation, in emissions reduction, in some norms of emissions, in low-carbon development. Yes, it is, unfortunately. I would like to add that the problems which Russia and Russians have now are long-term but temporary. The absence of Russia as an active player in carbon regulation, in emissions reduction, in some projects on greenhouse gas mitigation in 10 years or even in 20 years is not a global tragedy. It's just a part of the earth, not more. In any case, in any problem, somebody is an outsider. So if Russia will be the outsider in the next 20 years, it's not a tragedy for global progress, and it's not a tragedy for the Russian people, because fortunately, the situation with us is not so bad as in Armenia and Central Asia. So please do not dramatize this pause too much.
                


https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2023/10/20/why-is-climate-change-not-on-the-agenda-in-russia-a82834


The Moscow Times 3 
Russia’s Updated Climate Doctrine Drops Mention of Fossil Fuels 
Output Browser Output


                    
An updated version of Russia’s climate doctrine
signed
by President Vladimir Putin on Thursday has dropped language that directly links the burning of fossil fuels to greenhouse gas emissions.
Russia’s climate doctrine, first introduced in 2009, outlines the government’s policy on climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Thursday’s updated doctrine notes the “unprecedentedly high” rate of global warming in recent decades and its “significant, predominantly adverse” effects on Russia, which include heatwaves, droughts, permafrost melting, and the increased spread of infectious diseases.
But it also mentions the positive effects of human-induced climate change, such as the lower cost of heating buildings and easier access to the Arctic for commercial exploration due to melting polar ice.
At the same time, Russia’s climate doctrine maintains the government’s previously stated goals to
reach
climate neutrality by 2060 and to reduce emissions of planet-warming gases by 30% from 1990 levels by 2030 — the latter aim Moscow claims to have already achieved by cutting emissions by over 50% in 2020.
While the updated doctrine still acknowledges humans' impact on the climate in the form of greenhouse gas emissions, it drops wording that says such influence is “primarily associated” with emissions “from the combustion of fossil fuels,” which was present in the original version of the document.
Similarly, the document now mentions so-called “technological neutrality,” a principle Russia
promotes
at international summits and conferences to promote nuclear energy, arguing that it should be recognized as a key source of renewable energy for tackling the global climate crisis.
Russia, one of the world's top emitters of greenhouse gases and a major exporter of hydrocarbons, is already feeling the impacts of climate change.
But compared to Western countries, where concerns about the climate crisis are widespread, this topic is nearly invisible in Russian media, politics, and education.
A Message from The Moscow Times:
Dear readers,
We are facing unprecedented challenges. Russia's Prosecutor General's Office has designated The Moscow Times as an "undesirable" organization, criminalizing our work and putting our staff at risk of prosecution. This follows our earlier unjust labeling as a "foreign agent."
These actions are direct attempts to silence independent journalism in Russia. The authorities claim our work "discredits the decisions of the Russian leadership." We see things differently: we strive to provide accurate, unbiased reporting on Russia.
We, the journalists of The Moscow Times, refuse to be silenced. But to continue our work,
we need your help
.
Your support, no matter how small, makes a world of difference. If you can, please support us monthly starting from just
$
2.
It's quick to set up, and every contribution makes a significant impact.
By supporting The Moscow Times, you're defending open, independent journalism in the face of repression. Thank you for standing with us.
Continue
Not ready to support today?
Remind me later
.
                




https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2023/10/27/russias-updated-climate-doctrine-drops-mention-of-fossil-fuels-a82915


The Moscow Times 4 
How Is Climate Change Impacting Russia?
Output Browser Output


                    
As world leaders gather in Glasgow for the COP26 climate summit in hopes of agreeing on a strategy to avoid catastrophic global warming, Russia stands to face significant changes from climate change in the coming decades.
Here’s a look at some of the ways Russia, which is
warming
2.5 times faster than the planet, is already being impacted by climate change — and how these processes will only intensify:
Melting permafrost
Roughly 65% of Russia’s territory is
covered
in permafrost. As air temperatures have risen in recent decades, this soil that has been frozen for millennia has begun to thaw.
This melting is already reshaping the landscape of the tundra and is expected to cause significant damage to human settlements and key energy and transportation infrastructure. And as permafrost melts, it releases long-stored greenhouse gases like methane, triggering an accelerating feedback loop of warming.
President Vladimir Putin recently
told
his government to come up with a plan to counter this threat, which is
projected
to cost the Russian economy billions of dollars by 2050.
Floods and droughts
Climate change will make catastrophic floods and heatwaves increasingly frequent in Russia, WWF scientist Alexei Kokorin
told
The Moscow Times this August. While overall precipitation might not increase, it will become more unpredictable, with prolonged periods of both heavy rain and drought becoming more likely.
This year, the republic of Sakha in northeastern Siberia saw a record drought that, when combined with higher-than-normal temperatures, exacerbated the historic wildfires that tore across the region.
Forest fires
While forests act as a natural carbon sink by absorbing excess greenhouse gases, they quickly become major greenhouse gas emitters if a forest fire hits — as trees they release CO2 and harmful particles into the atmosphere when they burn.
Russia has seen increasingly severe wildfires in recent years, most of which have affected remote, hard-to-reach areas of Siberia and the Far East. This year, one Siberian wildfire
had a 2,000-kilometer frontline
, making it impossible for firefighters to combat the blazes.
Russia’s decarbonization strategy heavily
relies
on the country’s forests to absorb excess carbon emissions, a plan some experts have met with
skepticism
.
Desertification
As Earth’s climate zones shift from the Equator to the poles, previously forested lands are turning into deserts.
The desertification process has already
caused
significant harm to communities in the Russian republic of Dagestan some 1,500 kilometers south of Moscow.
Russia’s key agricultural regions are located near to Dagestan, and experts worry that desertification could spread to these regions and impact the country’s food supply.  If insufficient action is taken to combat climate change, desertification could reach Moscow itself by 2100, scientists at Aalto University
projected
.
A Message from The Moscow Times:
Dear readers,
We are facing unprecedented challenges. Russia's Prosecutor General's Office has designated The Moscow Times as an "undesirable" organization, criminalizing our work and putting our staff at risk of prosecution. This follows our earlier unjust labeling as a "foreign agent."
These actions are direct attempts to silence independent journalism in Russia. The authorities claim our work "discredits the decisions of the Russian leadership." We see things differently: we strive to provide accurate, unbiased reporting on Russia.
We, the journalists of The Moscow Times, refuse to be silenced. But to continue our work,
we need your help
.
.
                


https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2021/11/02/how-is-climate-change-impacting-russia-a75469


TASS 1 
"Ahead of global science." How Siberian scientists resolve global warming mystery
At least once every 100 years, in the Tomsk Region's outback the Ob river overflows so much that the water spreads for dozens of kilometers, giving birth to unique processes in the earth and water that affect global climate change and warming in the Arctic
Output Browser Output


                    
MOSCOW, June 25. /TASS Correspondent Anna Glushenkova/. A unique ecosystem exists in the Tomsk Region's outback - in the Ob River's floodplain near the Kaibasovo research station. At least once every 100 years, the river there overflows so much that the water spreads for dozens of kilometers, giving birth to unique processes in the earth and water that affect global climate change and warming in the Arctic. Those processes attract scientists from all over the world. They come to the world-class station and to the Kaibasovo carbon polygon, located there.
How to pass a difficult quest
The picturesque place, named Kaibasovo, is located in the very outback of the Tomsk Region - in the Ob River's floodplain. Getting there from Tomsk is quite an quest. First, you need to drive along a highway, then for about 20 km - along a crushed-stone road, and the last section of 7 km - by a swamp off-road vehicle through floodplain lands.
There used to be a village with the same name. It had 20 houses. Nowadays, there are only remains of wooden houses and dilapidated stoves across the field.
This location is place for the Tomsk State University's research station. There, scientists conduct world-class research related to global warming and carbon emissions.
"The Invisible Feat"
"It all has emerged not from big sciences, but rather from friendship, where people were ready to help each other and to do research at their own expense," a leading Russian researcher of the Arctic, the Tomsk University's scientist Sergey Kirpotin said. "There, at Kaibasovo, our colleague Viktor Drozdov had a house, and over first years we used it as a base and as an overnight accommodation. The house did not have regular beds - something like bunks. The advantage - they could accommodate eight people at a time. So everything started from that little house, and with time it was gaining infrastructures."
Direct Arctic studies also has emerged from friendship. Kirpotin met Terry Callaghan, a British experimental scientist, the winner of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize. He invited the young scientist from Tomsk to the Abisko Scientific Research Station in Sweden. Back then, Terry Callaghan was the station's director. Later on, he visited Tomsk. That was the beginning of first projects, which over time progressed to receiving grants, like, for example, from the Russian Science Foundation.
"Further on, politics got in the way, the projects were closed, and all our work, as they say, went down the drain. That was not just tension, it was a pause that lasted from the early 2000s until about 2010. Back then, I thought I'd rather invited Terry once again - we still kept very good relations. He did arrive, got a passion for Tomsk, and this is how appeared a Siberian network to study environmental changes, which he had initiated. Kaibasovo was integrated into this network and the mega-profile that we had created," the scientist said.
Later on, another famous scientist, Oleg Pokrovsky, got interested in the projects. Presently, he works at the Midi-Pyrenees Observatory (Toulouse, France), leading the Tomsk University's Laboratory of Bio-geo-chemical and Remote Environmental Monitoring Methods. In 2023, he was among Russia's top 5 best specialists in the Earth sciences.
Thanks to his support, the project to study the Ob River, including at the Kaibasovo station, in 2014 won a mega grant from the Russian government and reached the international level.
Nowadays, scientists enjoy accommodation, lab facilities and even a conference room - they are located in specially equipped trailers. The station participates in the Priority federal project and is part of the carbon polygon.
"The history of research is practically invisible feat where people work fueled by their enthusiasm or with very little financial support. And only later on it builds up, then schools, infrastructures, a world-class laboratory are created - we've passed all these stages. And - most importantly - we have developed a unique team of professors and young scientists, graduate students. Young scientists are actively involved in real projects; they come from different parts of the country," Kirpotin said.
Small parts of big science
They come not only from Russia. According to Sergey Vorobyov, director of the Megaprofil Collective Use Center, to which this station belongs, scientists from the US, China, Japan, Sweden, France, New Zealand, Singapore, and African countries have used to come to Kaibasovo. Scientists shared experience and at times cooperated for joint projects. Over the recent year, almost all the projects have collapsed, but the scientists do continue to come now - the relations have remained good.
Local residents from neighboring towns and villages actively participate in the research. Scientists always try to make friends with them in the very beginning, since who if not them do care for their land.
"Whenever on expeditions we come to new places, we always get acquainted with the administration, with the locals, and we talk to school students. Imagine: scientists come to a village school! And, moreover, give simple tasks, for example, to collect something, we explain to them why it is important, and leave to them various devices and sensors. Even if they are doing simple things, they anyway contribute to the global research, they assist sciences," the University's Chief Scientific Secretary for Scientific and Innovative Activities Lyudmila Borilo said.
There, at Kaibasovo, scientists have managed to create a very friendly and gentle atmosphere. Half way to the station, to where we went with the scientists, the locals were meeting us, and, as soon as we got there, they invited us to the table. According to Borilo, in summer, when scientists can stay at the station for several months, the locals often bring vegetables, eggs, milk and meat from their farms, and in winter they look after the station.
"We don't ask them about it, but we always welcome them, invite them to our meetings. We are very friendly with them. We always try to give them a chance to earn extra money - we employ them as guards, laboratory assistants and even guides. Every station is specific, and it's important to get along with everyone, otherwise you just leave - and they will immediately burn down the entire station," she laughed.
"Lyudmila Pavlovna" (first and middle names) is exactly the way everyone calls her here, a little breathlessly and lovingly. And this, in addition to nature and silence, gives additional peace to the place. Scientists often come there to write articles or to think something over, to systematize research results - it is just a perfect place. This is what Pokrovsky has been doing here from time to time, scientists say.
Some scientists may stay at the station for up to six months - nowadays, there are a few small wooden log houses, next to each other. They are called the "bird street" - because scientists with "bird" last names live there - Blackbird, Sparrow, Magpie.
The Second Amazon
The Ob River's floodplain, where the station is located, is interesting to scientists because it is very pronounced. "The Second Amazon" is what researchers call it. The river, that flows through lowland near Tomsk, may spread 60 km wide, flooding huge areas, all grasses, meadows, hay, shrubs and trees.
"In floods, during first few days, processes there are clear to us. Organic matter decomposes, carbon is released into water, from water into the atmosphere. But after a short time, algae appear there, and everything changes. At that point, the vegetation decomposition is not as important as activities of those algae. They can accumulate soluble carbon dioxide (CO2), and algae use it to build their biomass," Vorobyov said.
Logically, the more CO2 in the water, the more should be emissions into the atmosphere, he explained, but there scientists faced a situation where a lot of CO2 in the water would not emit into the atmosphere. Even vice versa: the water absorbs even more carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere.
The biggest discovery was that in the Ob basin, in small rivers, the carbon content is significantly higher and its emission is several times higher than in other northern and Arctic territories. This means that the climate will be changing not so rapidly. "Western Siberia's contribution into slowing climate change is immeasurably higher than the contribution of other territories. Due to a lot of swamps, peat soils, a large floodplain," he said.
"The big is seen from a distance"
"Our main focus was the Arctic, but you can't study the Arctic just sitting in the Arctic, because "the big is seen from a distance," as Yesenin said. Otherwise, the opinion may be wrong. All major Siberian rivers originate in the Altai-Sayan mountains system and run northbound," he continued.
The vegetation, flooded there, is "brewed" like tea, and further on it flows into the river, getting eventually into the World Ocean - the main climate regulator. According to scientists, all processes related to global warming begin in the south - not at all in the north. "That was very weird and in fact, nobody has addressed this matter. We were 10 years ahead of the global science, having created this mega-profile, or megatranset approach," he noted.
A mega-profile, he explained, is an axis, a conditional line along which research is conducted. For example, Kaibasovo is one of the stations of the mega profile created along the Ob River - from the source to the mouth. However, there is another axis that scientists are just starting to explore - it stretches from west to east, along the continental gradient - the climate severity increase.
In the conversation, Borilo mentioned the "third axis" - a horizontal one, where the "third pole" is the mountains and glaciers that are located there. "For example, permafrost exists also in the Altai Mountains - it is the high-altitude permafrost. If you look from top to bottom: first the ice, then the mosses, shrubs, then the forest. A similar, though horizontal, picture is when you go to the tundra, while processes are the same, and the weather is changing all over the Earth," she explained.
Siberia is a universe
"To understand the processes, we did a lot at the first stage, and some would say the topic could be closed: the main trends are clear and are not likely to change significantly. But this territory is unique - an endless field for work. Siberia is a universe to explore endlessly," Kirpotin noted.
Take for example his current studies of earth ants. A huge number of anthills are scattered across the floodplain, literally on every square meter or even more often. However, no one can say for sure what kind of work those small creatures are doing from an ecological point of view, what contribution they make, what they may influence.
"We have walked along the entire Ob - all the way from the Altai to Salekhard. We've made measurements everywhere and found out that in the upper reaches, before Tomsk, the Ob absorbs CO2, and after Tomsk it begins to emit it. Why? We have been working on it. Everything is very difficult: quite many [specialists] are involved in the carbon balance, and almost nobody studies mechanisms that influence it. When we learn these mechanisms, then at the next stage we will be able to influence them, to improve the Earth's atmosphere. Next, when we put it in order, we would be able to take care of the atmosphere of Mars, Venus, we will surf the space," Vorobyov said, adding with a smile that it is practically impossible to study all those mechanisms to the end, since everything changes with time: the climate, the carbon balance, and even those mechanisms.
Kirpotin pointed to the importance of such long-term monitoring. The longer it continues the more valuable and significant its results become.
No doing without Siberia
"All the studies are needed to create a model of the floodplain ecosystem. Any research of the kind eventually ends up with a mathematical model, then it is presented to the world scientific community and then it is used in global climate conclusions. The latter, are constantly recalculated, updated, and improved. This seemingly small piece of land - Siberia - gives very high emission rates," Vorobyov said.
All the aspects are used to put together a complete picture of the Earth's atmosphere and to create mechanisms to reduce the carbon footprint. Exactly for this purpose, Kaibasovo has become part of a carbon polygon, which will collect data on carbon dioxide emissions by using special equipment in compliance with international methods. The Tomsk University's polygon unites four territories, which together cover three ecosystems - forest, swamp and floodplain.
"Last year, we bought an American tower, it will be installed soon. This year we will buy another two towers to have them installed on all ecosystems. And, whenever everything is ready, we will launch simultaneously a new series of climate monitoring at all the stations," Borilo said.
Buying the first tower was nothing special - with preliminary agreements, thus the price changed quite a bit and only due to logistics. This year, however, to logistics adds a price spike, she said.
"While in the past we could buy three, now we can afford only two, and not that sophisticated towers. In addition to the tower itself, we need special equipment. We had to buy the very minimum. Another problem is time - nobody can guarantee we will receive them this year. But, anyway, the process has started," the scientist said.
A carbon farm will be next to the Kaibasovo polygon. It will be used to practice technologies to accumulate effectively carbon from water, air and soil for subsequent processing or disposal. The ultimate goal is to compensate for the environmental damage caused by greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere.
"Whatever may happen in politics, as for climate, we cannot be isolated from any countries. A too significant share of ecosystems necessary to understand global climate processes is located in Siberia and Russia," Borilo said in conclusion.
                




https://tass.com/economy/1807929


TASS 2 
Russia relying on unique resource of its forests by aiming to build carbon-neutral economy


Russian President Vladimir Putin also pointed out that the conservation of forests and other natural ecosystems was a key component of international efforts to address global warming and reduce emissions of greenhouse gases




                    
MOSCOW, November 2. /TASS/. In its pursuit to build a carbon-neutral economy by 2060 Russia relies, among other things, on the unique resource of its forests, according to a video message from Russian President Vladimir Putin to the participants of the World Leaders Summit on Action on Forests and Land Use held within the framework of the 26th Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) in Glasgow.
"By aiming to build a carbon-neutral economy by no later than 2060, Russia is relying, among other things, on the unique resource of forest ecosystems available to us, and their significant capacity to absorb carbon dioxide and produce oxygen. After all, our country accounts for around 20% of the world’s forestland," Putin said.
"The conservation of forests and other natural ecosystems is a key component of international efforts to address global warming and reduce emissions of greenhouse gases," he noted. This topic fits organically into the multidimensional agenda of the Glasgow Climate Change Conference, according to the Russian leader.
Moscow takes the strongest and most vigorous measures to conserve forests, improves forest management, fights illegal logging and forest fires, expands reforestation areas, consistently increases funding for these purposes, Putin said.
"Russia supports the draft joint declaration on forests and land-use proposed for approval at today’s meeting. We expect its implementation to facilitate closer partnerships between all interested states in forest conservation," he said.
"This will undoubtedly serve to fulfill the objectives of reducing levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere set out in the Paris Agreement," he added.
                


https://tass.com/politics/1357047 


TASS 3 
Russian forest fires swell to 143,500 hectares — authorities
The largest fires are burning in the Sakha Region (over 58,000 hectares), the Khanty-Mansiysk Autonomous Region (about 54,800 hectares) and the Magadan Region (15,100 hectares)
MOSCOW, August 6. /TASS/. Russia’s forest fires swelled to 143,500 hectares in the past day, the Aerial Forest Protection Service said in a statement on Saturday.
"A total of 126 forest fires engulfing 143,545 hectares were active in Russia as of midnight on August 6, 2022. Active efforts are underway to extinguish the blazes," the statement reads. As of Friday, the total size of Russian forest fires stood at 126,400 hectares.
The largest fires are burning in the Sakha Region (over 58,000 hectares), the Khanty-Mansiysk Autonomous Region (about 54,800 hectares) and the Magadan Region (15,100 hectares).
Firefighting activities involve 4,224 personnel, 377 pieces of equipment and 21 aircraft. Another 74 aircraft are monitoring the fire situation. Fifty-five forest fires scorching more than 2,300 hectares were extinguished in Russia in the past 24 hours.


https://tass.com/environment/1490305


TASS 4
COP28 to present vision of future climate cooperation – Russian envoy
Output Browser Output


                    
DUBAI, December 9. /TASS/. The participants of the 28th UN Climate Change Conference (COP28) are to present an integral, realistic and inclusive vision of future climate cooperation, head of Russia’s delegation, Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Ruslan Edelgeriyev said.
"The key task of COP28 is to assess the ability of the international community to reach goals set earlier and on the basis of this assessment to present the vision of future climate cooperation. This vision should be ambitious, though integral, realistic and inclusive at the same time," he said.
"We cannot but take into consideration the variety of needs of the population in various parts of the world, including the need for available and reliable energy, water and food, as well as in a broader sense for raising the quality of life," Edelgeriyev added.
COP28 will be held until December 12.
                




https://tass.com/world/1718523


Rt news 1 




Global elites flying private jets to COP26 climate conference emit more CO2 than hundreds of citizens would in a year – UK media
Output Browser Output


                    
The bigwigs heading to Scotland for the COP26 climate summit – where they ostensibly aim to help save the planet from greenhouse gases – will generate outsized emissions themselves by employing private jets for the trip.
More than 400 private jets carrying politicians and business executives to this week’s conference will belch out 13,000 tons of carbon dioxide, exceeding the emissions of 1,600 average Scots for a full year, according to an
estimate
by the UK’s Sunday Mail.
“Private jets are very prestigious, but it is difficult to avoid the hypocrisy of using one while claiming to be fighting climate change,”
environmental activist Matt Finch told the newspaper.
Heads of states and other leaders from across the globe will be among the private jet-setters – from Japan to India to Israel to even the UK itself. US President Joe Biden is reportedly scheduled to arrive on
Air Force One
on Monday.
That trip will follow the American president’s flight from Washington to Rome for this weekend’s G20 summit, where leaders pledged
“meaningful and effective”
climate action but offered few specifics on how they will keep temperatures from rising more than 1.5 degrees Celsius.
It’s not clear whether Biden will again deploy a massive motorcade, such as the 85-car parade of gas-guzzling vehicles that chaperoned his visit to the Vatican on Friday to meet with Pope Francis. Biden is expected to tout more than $500 billion in proposed US spending on environmental programs when he gets to Glasgow.
Also on rt.com
‘Very green’: VIDEO of Biden’s massive 85-car motorcade ahead of climate summit leaves critics stunned
Critics blasted the COP26 participants for professing to fight climate change while doing nothing to pare their enormous carbon footprints.
“Every world leader or dignitary that arrives to COP26 by private jet is an eco-hypocrite,”
former member of the European parliament Nigel Farage said on Sunday in a Twitter post.
Every world leader or dignitary that arrives to
@COP26
by private jet is an eco-hypocrite. Fact.
— Nigel Farage (@Nigel_Farage)
October 31, 2021
Britain’s Prince Charles and Prime Minister Boris Johnson were among those targeted for criticism, inasmuch as they took private jets to Rome and Scotland. Johnson also drew political pushback in June, when he traveled to Cornwall by private jet for the
G7 summit
rather than taking a train from London.
Prince Charles will take a private jet to Rome to take part in the G20 conference before returning via private jet to the
#COP26
summit in Glasgow to express his concern over climate change. Seriously.
pic.twitter.com/Y7vS5lo0WZ
— James Melville (@JamesMelville)
October 30, 2021
According to Finch’s Transport and Environment NGO group, CO2 output from private jets is
soaring
, which helps account for the fact that 1% of the population generates half of global aviation emissions. Flying by private jet emits about 40 times as much CO2 per passenger as commercial air travel, according to a study by Lund University.
Biden’s climate envoy, John Kerry, has been another alleged environmental hypocrite for globe-trotting by private jet while warning that
“we cannot afford further delay”
in solving the climate crisis. His family’s Gulfstream GIV-SP
reportedly emitted
an estimated 116 metric tons of CO2 in the 11 months leading up to Biden’s inauguration in January – equivalent to the annual emissions of 25 passenger cars.
Kerry’s explanation for traveling by private jet might resonate with many of the COP26 dignitaries. After traveling to Iceland by private plane to receive an environmental award in 2019, he said in an interview that there was really no other option for someone like him.
“The time it takes me to get somewhere, I can’t sail across the ocean,”
Kerry said, without mentioning such options as commercial airlines.
“I have to fly, meet with people and get things done.”
He added,
“If you offset your carbon, it’s the only choice for somebody like me who is traveling the world to win this battle.”
Also on rt.com
‘The only choice for SOMEBODY LIKE ME’: US climate czar John Kerry defends flying PRIVATE JET to Iceland to receive enviro award
Like this story? Share it with a friend!
                


https://www.rt.com/news/539018-cop26-private-jet-hypocrisy/




RT NEWS 2 
Western sanctions destroying global warming research – NYT
Scientists in the EU and US have been prevented from working with key data from Russia, according to the newspaper
Output Browser Output


                    
Scientists in the EU and US have been prevented from working with key data from Russia, according to the newspaper
Vital research into climate change has been stymied by Western sanctions against Russia, which holds crucial data about the Arctic, according to the New York Times.
American and European scientists studying the areas beyond the Arctic Circle were told to cease collaboration with their Russian counterparts following the escalation of the Ukraine conflict in February 2022 and the ensuing Western sanctions against Moscow, the outlet reported on Tuesday.
The move left Western scientists scrambling for crucial data, the NYT has reported, as Russia makes up over half of the Arctic in terms of coastline and land mass.
Monitoring the temperatures in region is central to climate change research and modelling, as the melting ice contributes to rising sea levels, and changing temperature and precipitation patterns.
“It may be impossible to understand how the Arctic is changing without Russia,”
the newspaper quoted Italian permafrost scientist Alessandro Longhi as saying.
The exclusion of Russia means that
“half of the Arctic climate dataset is currently missing,”
according to the Danish Institute for International Studies.
Most EU and NATO members decided to suspend all research projects involving Russian institutions or taking place in Russia in the immediate aftermath of the Ukraine conflict.
Russian field stations were removed from the International Network for Terrestrial Research and Monitoring in the Arctic, a global network of 60 field stations in the northern latitudes. This led to a
“marked”
loss of data used to monitor changes in ecosystems, a study published in the British scientific journal Nature earlier this year noted.
Scientific ties in the Arctic are evolving, however, with new partnerships, namely with China and India, being fostered, the Russian Council on International Affairs said earlier this year.
According to a previous report in the Russian daily Nezavisimaya Gazeta, BRICS states and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as well as countries in Latin America, the Middle East, and Asia-Pacific region have expressed interest in the Arctic.
China and India have moved from being observers in the Arctic Council, an intergovernmental forum promoting cooperation among the Arctic states, to actively participating in Arctic research projects, the publication noted.
                




RT NEWS 3 


Is the Premier League’s target of a ‘net zero carbon’ game just another virtue-signaling own goal?
Output Browser Output


                    
On Sunday, Tottenham will host Chelsea in a match they hope will become the first-ever 'net zero carbon' elite-level game – but does the evidence suggest that the attempt is anything but a drop in an ever-rising ocean?
The initiative, launched by Tottenham and British broadcaster Sky, aims to reduce as much as possible the carbon footprint associated with the game by asking fans to travel to the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium in as environmentally conscious a means as possible, while sustainable vegan products will be widely available at the various concession stands inside the stadium.
Sky have also pledged to cut their emissions while broadcasting the match and players from both clubs will arrive at the ground on buses powered by eco-friendly biofuel.
It doesn't stop there. During the match – which is being dubbed #GameZero – players will drink water from cartons rather than plastic bottles, while Spurs have also promised to offset any carbon emissions which slip through the gaps with natural remedies such as planting trees.
♻️ We are proud to send zero waste to landfill and are encouraging fans to do their bit by recycling when at the stadium. Take a look at our useful guide ahead of attending Sunday’s net zero carbon match. 👇
pic.twitter.com/Kdn8zwpGXh
— Tottenham Hotspur (@SpursOfficial)
September 18, 2021
The UK government has also endorsed the net zero carbon game ahead of hosting the international COP26 climate talks in Glasgow in November, where methods to help mitigate global carbon emissions will be among the topics for discussions.
But while all of this can be considered a worthwhile gesture to help raise awareness for the very real dangers of climate change, it is difficult to escape the thought that very little can be achieved by asking fans to cycle to a football match or to exchange their meat pie for a vegan alternative – other than the inevitable resentment which would surely follow.
If we have learned one thing from the past 18 months or so, it is that people – and especially large swathes of football fans – don't like having their hand held and lectured that whatever social issue being championed that week is 'for a good cause'.
We saw this during repeated breaches of social distancing guidelines related to football throughout Euro 2020 and elsewhere, as well as in the wildly divisive debates which took place regarding footballers taking a knee before games.
Larger than that, massive multinational companies such as Sky miss the central point when the issue these types of directives, which almost always come with a gushing PR campaign behind them: it isn't so much an individual football fan who should be compelled to change their behavior, but rather enterprises like Sky themselves.
Sure, an individual person deciding to change their own habits in a bid to become more environmentally conscious can only be described as a good thing on a granular level.
And yes, a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step and all that – but a recent estimate which asserted that just 100 companies are responsible for around 71 percent of global emissions spells out in clear embossed lettering where the real source of the problem lies.
It is perhaps telling, then, that Sky have refused requests to share the data from #GameZero after the match – just one of 380 games which will take place in England's top flight this season.
Also on rt.com
‘Pathetic gesture politics’: Fans scoff at plans to make Spurs vs Chelsea ‘net zero carbon match’ with vegan food & biofuel buses
If real change is what is truly craved then clubs like Tottenham might be better served in refusing sponsorship deals with brands whose own carbon emissions are past a certain high-water mark – something which, if adopted unilaterally across European football, may begin to force change.
Until that day comes, what we're left with is large companies displaying their virtue and excusing themselves from any blame, 'offsetting' their emissions by planting a few trees.
And that sounds like 'carbon-laundering'.
By John Balfe
The statements, views and opinions expressed in this column are solely those of the author and do not necessarily represent those of RT.
Also on rt.com
Former Premier League ref says Chelsea racism row ‘almost ruined his life’, claims Blues player told him he’d ‘break his legs’
                






https://www.rt.com/sport/535217-premier-league-carbon-net-zero/




RT NEWS 4 
Scientists confirm 2023 hottest year on record
Temperatures were “very likely” the highest in 100,000 years, an EU climate watchdog has said
The year 2023 was the hottest on record and likely the hottest in tens of thousands of years, the EU’s Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) revealed in its annual Global Climate Highlights report published on Tuesday.
With a global average temperature of 14.98 degrees Celsius according to C3S’ ERA5 data set, 2023 beat the average temperature of the previous record year, 2016, by 0.17 degrees – a “  remarkable  ” margin, the organization’s director, Carlos Buontempo, told Reuters.
While global temperature records only exist dating back to 1850, C3S scientists used alternative sources of data, such as tree rings and air bubbles in glaciers, to reach the conclusion that 2023 was “  very likely  ” the warmest year in 100,000 years, Buontempo said.


The year marked the first time on record that every day was more than one degree Celsius hotter than the average temperatures recorded during the “  pre-industrial  ” reference period of 1850 to 1900, according to the report. The months of June through December were warmer than corresponding months from previous years, while July and August were the warmest two months on record. July saw the highest absolute temperatures.
Last year’s temperatures were on average 1.48 degrees warmer than the pre-industrial level, leading scientists to predict that the coming year will finally exceed 1.5 degrees of warming, the marker that signatories of the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement crafted their climate policies to avoid as representative of the most severe consequences of climate change.
Nearly half of 2023’s days were more than 1.5 degrees hotter than the same dates in 2022, setting “  a dire precedent  ” for the future, and two days in November were a full two degrees warmer than during the pre-industrial period.
Carbon dioxide levels in Earth’s atmosphere also reached the highest level ever recorded in 2023, hitting 419 parts per million, according to the report.
While much coverage of the report attributed the rising temperatures to climate change, C3S also acknowledged the role of El Niño, a recurrent weather phenomenon that warms the surface of the eastern Pacific Ocean, often triggering unpredictable or severe weather and temperature fluctuations around the world. El Niño began in early July, according to the World Meteorological Organization, and record-high sea surface temperatures followed, reaching 21.02 degrees Celsius in August.
The scientists argued that even climate change and El Niño could not fully account for the unusually high temperatures, suggesting additional “  minor contributors  ” like the approach of a peak solar cycle, the January 2022 eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano, and a drop in emissions from the European shipping industry played a role in the record-setting heatwave.




https://www.rt.com/news/590353-2023-hottest-year-climate-change/


Jakarta post 1
 
COP29: What is the latest science on climate change? The last global scientific consensus on climate change was released in 2021 through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, however scientists say that evidence shows global warming and its impacts are unfolding faster than expected.

This year's U.N. climate summit - COP29 - is being held during yet another record-breaking year of higher global temperatures, adding pressure to negotiations aimed at curbing climate change. The last global scientific consensus on climate change was released in 2021 through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, however scientists say that evidence shows global warming and its impacts are unfolding faster than expected. Here is some of the latest climate research: 1.5C breached? The world may already have hit 1.5 degree Celsius (2.7 F) of warming above the average pre-industrial temperature - a critical threshold beyond which it is at risk of irreversible and extreme climate change, scientists say. A group of researchers made the suggestion in a study released on Monday based on an analysis of 2,000 years of atmospheric gases trapped in Antarctic ice cores that extends the understanding of pre-industrial temperature trends. Scientists have typically measured today's temperatures against a baseline temperature average for 1850-1900. By that measure, the world is now at nearly 1.3 C (2.4 F) of warming. But the new data suggests a longer pre-industrial baseline, based on temperature data spanning the year 13 to 1700, the study published in the journal Nature Geoscience said. Either way, 2024 is certain to be the warmest year on record. Supercharged hurricanes Not only is ocean warming fueling stronger Atlantic storms, it is also causing them to intensify more rapidly, for example, jumping from a Category 1 to a Category 3 storm in just hours. Growing evidence shows this is true of other ocean basins. Hurricane Milton needed only one day in the Gulf of Mexico in October to go from tropical storm to the Gulf's second-most powerful hurricane on record, slamming Florida's west coast. Warmer air can also hold more moisture, helping storms carry and eventually release more rain. As a result, hurricanes are delivering flooding even in mountain towns like Asheville, North Carolina, inundated in September by Hurricane Helene. Wildfire deaths Global warming is drying waterways and sapping moisture from forests, creating conditions for bigger and hotter wildfires from the U.S. West and Canada to southern Europe and Russia's Far East creating more damaging smoke. Research published last month in Nature Climate Change calculated that about 13% of deaths associated with toxic wildfire smoke, roughly 12,000 deaths, during the 2010s could be attributed to the climate effect on wildfires. Coral bleaching With the world in the throes of a fourth mass coral bleaching event — the largest on record — scientists fear the world's reefs have passed a point of no return. Scientists will be studying bleached reefs from Australia to Brazil for signs of recovery over the next few years if temperatures fall. Amazon alarm Brazil's Amazon is in the grips of its worst and most widespread drought since records began in 1950. River levels sank to all-time lows this year, while fires ravaged the rainforest. This adds concern to scientific findings earlier this year that between 10% and 47% of the Amazon will face combined stresses of heat and drought from climate change, as well as other threats, by 2050. This could push the Amazon past a tipping point, with the jungle no longer able to produce enough moisture to quench its own trees, at which point the ecosystem could transition to degraded forests or sandy savannas. Globally, forests appear to be struggling. A July study found that forests overall last year failed to absorb as much carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as in the past, due largely to the Amazon drought and wildfires in Canada. That means a record amount of CO2 entered the atmosphere. Volcanic surge Scientists fear climate change could even boost volcanic eruptions. In Iceland, volcanoes appear to be responding to rapid glacier retreat. As ice melts, less pressure is exerted on the Earth's crust and mantle. Volcanologists worry this could destabilize magma reservoirs and appears to be leading to more magma being created, building up pressure underground. Some 245 volcanoes across the world lie under or near ice and could be at risk. Ocean slowdown The warming of the Atlantic could hasten the collapse of a key current system, which scientists warn could already be sputtering. The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), which transports warm water from the tropics to the North Atlantic, has helped to keep European winters milder for centuries. Research in 2018 showed that AMOC has weakened by about 15% since 1950, while research published in February in the journal Science Advances, suggested that it could be closer to a critical slowdown than previously thought.

This article was published in thejakartapost.com with the title "". Click to read: https://www.thejakartapost.com/culture/2024/11/12/cop29-what-is-the-latest-science-on-climate-change.html.



 
Jakarta post 2
 
'Dangerous new era': Climate change spurs disaster in 2024 
This year is the hottest in history, with record-breaking temperatures in the atmosphere and oceans acting like fuel for extreme weather around the world.

From tiny and impoverished Mayotte to oil-rich behemoth Saudi Arabia, prosperous European cities and overcrowded slums in Africa, nowhere was spared the devastating impact of supercharged climate disasters in 2024. This year is the hottest in history, with record-breaking temperatures in the atmosphere and oceans acting like fuel for extreme weather around the world. World Weather Attribution (WWA), experts on how global warming influences extreme events, said nearly every disaster they analyzed over the past 12 months was intensified by climate change. "The impacts of fossil fuel warming have never been clearer or more devastating than in 2024. We are living in a dangerous new era," said climate scientist Friederike Otto, who leads the WWA network. Heat That was tragically evident in June when more than 1,300 people died during the Muslim hajj pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia where temperatures hit 51.8 degrees. Extreme heat, which is sometimes dubbed the “silent killer”, also proved deadly in Thailand, India and the United States. Conditions were so intense in Mexico that howler monkeys dropped dead from the trees, while Pakistan kept millions of children at home as the mercury inched above 50 degrees. Greece recorded its earliest ever heatwave, forcing the closure of its famed Acropolis and fanning terrible wildfires at the outset of Europe's hottest summer yet. Floods Climate change isn't just sizzling temperatures; warmer oceans mean higher evaporation and warmer air absorbs more moisture, a volatile recipe for heavy rainfall. In April, the United Arab Emirates received two years’ worth of rain in a single day, turning parts of the desert-state into a sea, and hobbling Dubai's international airport. Kenya was barely out of a once-in-a-generation drought when the worst floods in decades delivered back-to-back disasters for the East African nation.

Four million people needed aid after historic flooding killed more than 1,500 people across West and Central Africa. Europe, most notably Spain, also suffered tremendous downpours that caused deadly flash flooding. Afghanistan, Russia, Brazil, China, Nepal, Uganda, India, Somalia, Pakistan, Burundi and the United States were among other countries that witnessed flooding in 2024. Cyclones Warmer ocean surfaces feed energy into tropical cyclones as they barrel toward land, whipping up fierce winds and their destructive potential. Major hurricanes pummeled the US and Caribbean, most notably Milton, Beryl and Helene, in a 2024 season of above-average storm activity. The Philippines endured six major storms in November alone, just two months after suffering Typhoon Yagi as it tore through Southeast Asia. In December, scientists said global warming had helped intensify Cyclone Chino to a category 4 storm as it collided head-on with Mayotte, devastating France's poorest overseas territory. Droughts and wildfires Some regions may be wetter as climate change shifts rainfall patterns, but others are becoming drier and more vulnerable to drought. The Americas suffered severe drought in 2024 and wildfires torched millions of hectares in the western US, Canada and the Amazon basin, usually one of Earth's wettest places. Between January and September, more than 400,000 fires were recorded across South America, shrouding the continent in choking smoke. The World Food Programme in December said 26 million people across southern Africa were at risk of hunger as a months-long drought parched the impoverished region. Economic toll Extreme weather cost thousands of lives in 2024 and left countless more in desperate poverty. The lasting toll of such disasters is impossible to quantify. In terms of economic losses, Zurich-based reinsurance giant Swiss Re estimated the global damage bill at US$310 billion, according to a statement issued in early December.
Flooding in Europe, particularly in the Spanish province of Valencia, where over 200 people died in October, and hurricanes Helene and Milton drove up the cost, the company said. As of Nov. 1, the US had suffered 24 weather disasters in 2024 with losses exceeding US$1 billion each, government figures showed. Drought in Brazil cost its farming sector $2.7 billion between June and August, while "climatic challenges" drove global wine production to its lowest level since 1961, an industry body said.

This article was published in thejakartapost.com with the title "". Click to read: https://www.thejakartapost.com/culture/2024/12/29/dangerous-new-era-climate-change-spurs-disaster-in-2024.html.




The Japan times
 
From Japan to India, countries must work together to prepare for extreme heat and other impacts.
 
It is important to assess the vulnerabilities of health systems and the effectiveness of countermeasures to address these impacts.
There is increasing attention and urgency in addressing these needs. Yet on the global stage, we are still reminded that “the climate crisis is a health crisis, but for too long, health has been a footnote in climate discussions,” in the words of WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus at the COP28 United Nations climate change conference in Dubai last December.
Many applauded discussions on the link between climate change and health at COP28 but it remains to be seen whether this topic will be center stage in climate negotiations, bringing governments together for coordinated action, on the road to this year’s COP29 in Azerbaijan and next year’s COP30 scheduled in Brazil.
However, the long-drawn-out negotiations at the WHO regarding a pandemic prevention, preparedness and response treaty that is yet to see the light of day give me pause: The intergovernmental body responsible for the drafting and negotiation process was set up in 2021 but has not yet yielded a convention, agreement or international instrument. How soon can we get countries to develop agreed actions to tackle the nexus between climate change and health?
In tackling this nexus, we must understand the importance of aligning climate policies with health policies. However, this momentum has not yet gained traction across high-level meetings. The commitments that countries make at forums like the G20, G7 and U.N. General Assembly — and COP, naturally — must be followed by concrete interventions to protect and use the environment sustainably and address health concerns.
To develop long-lasting, feasible solutions, we need to look at climate change and health as one problem. Countries must work together to support health and well-being and present and future generations’ right to a healthy environment. If we are to have any chance of slowing down global heating, resilience and adaptation must be baked into our societies.
Smritima D. Lama is a public health expert from India and a visiting researcher at Hitotsubashi University, Tokyo. She is the recipient of the Japan Foundation’s Indo-Pacific Partnership Fellowship 2023 and is researching national-level actions to deal with climate change-related health emergencies in Japan and elsewhere.
https://features.japantimes.co.jp/climate-change-health-care-impacts/
From Japan to India, countries must work together to prepare for extreme heat and other impacts
BY SMRITIMA D. LAMA
 
 
The Jakarta post 3
 
Climate change made 2022 drought ‘at least 20 times likelier’ 
Successive heatwaves between June and July, which saw temperatures top 40 degrees Celsius in the United Kingdom for the first time, saw some 24,000 excess deaths in Europe.
Human-caused climate change made this summer's drought across the Northern Hemisphere at least 20 times more likely, according to a rapid analysis released on Wednesday that warns such extreme dry periods will become increasingly common with global heating.  The three months from June-August were the hottest in Europe since records began, and the exceptionally high temperatures led to the worst drought the continent has witnessed since the Middle Ages.  Crops withered in European breadbaskets, as the historic dry spell drove record wildfire intensity and placed severe pressure on the continent's power grid.  Successive heatwaves between June and July, which saw temperatures top 40 degrees Celsius in the United Kingdom for the first time, saw some 24,000 excess deaths in Europe. China and North America also experienced unusually high temperatures and exceptionally low rainfall over the period. An international team of climate scientists have determined the warming caused by human activity made such extreme weather significantly more likely than it would have been at the dawn of the industrial age.  The World Weather Attribution service calculated that the agricultural and ecological drought over the Northern Hemisphere was at least 20 times likelier thanks to global heating.  "The 2022 summer has shown how human-induced climate change is increasing the risks of agricultural and ecological droughts in densely populated and cultivated regions of the North Hemisphere," said Sonia Seneviratne, a professor at the Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science at ETH Zurich in Switzerland and one of the study contributors. 'Faster than expected' To quantify the effect of human-caused climate change on soil moisture levels, the team analysed weather data and computer simulations to compare the real climate as it is today – that is, some 1.2 degrees hotter than pre-industrial levels – with a climate absent of any human-induced heating. They found that western and central Europe experienced particularly severe drought and substantially reduced crop yields. Moisture in the top 7 centimeters of soil across the Northern Hemisphere was made five times likelier to experience severe drought due to climate change, the study found.  For the top 1 meter of soil – known as the root zone – this summer's dryness was made at least 20 times likelier due to global heating. "Really what is most relevant for agriculture and ecological impacts is the top 1 meter of the soil because that's where plants have their roots," said Seneviratne. Overall, a Northern Hemisphere drought such as this summer's was now likely to occur once every 20 years in today's climate, compared with once every 400 years in the mid 18th century. Producers in Europe and China have warned of significantly lower than expected harvests in crop staples due to the dry spell, after food prices spiked to multi-year highs following Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February. Friederike Otto, senior lecturer in climate science at the Imperial College London, called the crop shortfall "particularly worrying". "It followed a climate change-fueled heatwave in South Asia that also destroyed crops, and happened at a time when global food prices were already extremely high due to the war in Ukraine," she said. Otto said the Northern Hemisphere in general was showing a "pure climate change signal" in its overall warming trends.  Maarten van Aalst, director of the Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Center and professor of climate and disaster resilience at University of Twente, said governments needed to do far more to prepare for future heat and drought shocks, which will become ever more frequent as temperatures rise.  "We're talking tens of thousands of people killed by these phenomena and one thing that we're seeing is the impacts compounding and cascading across regions and sectors," he said.  "It's playing out in front of our eyes even faster than we might have expected."

This article was published in thejakartapost.com with the title "". Click to read: https://www.thejakartapost.com/paper/2022/10/06/climate-change-made-2022-drought-at-least-20-times-likelier.html.




The Jakarta post 4
 
Finally responsible:
 Indonesian consumers now more conscious with their shopping More Indonesian customers are becoming environmentally responsible and seeking to reduce carbon emissions by making smart purchasing choices. 

More Indonesian customers are becoming environmentally responsible and seeking to reduce carbon emissions by making smart choices.  Indonesian influencer Ankayama decided to buy only organic and vegan beauty products in 2019. This decision mainly arises from her desire to protect her sensitive skin and Planet Earth.  “Plant-based and organic products are biodegradable,” Ankayama said at the BASE x JEJAKIN Carbon Offset Sustainability Initiative launch at Taman Wisata Alam Mangrove, North Jakarta, on March 1. “So, these products don’t only benefit my skin, but also the environment.”  The beauty enthusiast is one of many. Lately, more Indonesian customers are becoming environmentally conscious and consuming eco-friendly products.  A shift in buying behavior “We’re seeing a growing interest among Indonesians in practicing conscious consumerism,” Ratih Permata Sari, cofounder and chief product officer of the local cosmetic and skincare brand BASE, said. “When buying something, they see it as a vote to the causes or movements they support.”  Stella Septania Farronikka, expert panel on environmental, social governance (ESG) and sustainable development of the National Center for Corporate Reporting (NCCR), agreed.  “I think the pandemic [COVID-19] was a real eye-opener as to how our acts can impact the whole world,” she said during a journalism class at BNP Paribas AM office in Sequis Tower, South Jakarta, on March 2.  “As a result, many are now becoming more careful in making decisions.”  Millennials and Generation Z are apparently more concerned with the environment than their more senior counterparts. Many of them consider environmental sustainability before deciding to buy or invest.  “Millennials and Gen Z grew up seeing climate change phenomena everywhere,” Stella said. “So, they’re more environmentally conscious and want to take real action to rein in [climate change].”  Knowing is taking responsibility Rasis Putra Ritonga, data manager of the Archipelago Nature Conservation Foundation (Yayasan Konservasi Alam Nusantara, YKAN), has bought most of his clothes, jackets and shoes from local second-hand stores since 2018.  The data scientist made this vital decision mainly to reduce his carbon footprint. 
“Each person emits an average of four tonnes of carbon per year,” Rasis said during an interview at Senayan City, Central Jakarta, on March 25. “This is such a huge number and directly contributes to global warming.”  Conscious buying is a way to lower carbon emissions and slow global warming.  “What we consume matters,” Didi Kaspi Kasim, editor-in-chief of National Geographic Indonesia, said in Cibubur Junction, East Jakarta, on March 3.  “Currently, the extinction rate of [Indonesian] species is quite advanced,” Didi said. “In the next 10-20 years, Indonesia may lose many endemic flora and fauna because of our buying behavior.”  As a responsible consumer, Didi has made it a habit to research the products he consumes and their producers.  “I always strive to be well-informed about the products I consume, as well as the companies that produce them,” Didi said. “I want to know what [these companies] do to the environment and the people around them before supporting them [by buying their products].”  Ripple effects  As customers become more ecologically conscious, companies have evolved to be greener in their operations.  “[Our company] does it end-to-end,” Ratih Permata Sari of BASE said. “We try to avoid carbon emissions first and then remove the unavoidable carbon footprints.”  To reduce carbon emissions, this local cosmetics and skincare brand uses nonendangered plants as the materials of its products. BASE also uses biodegradable plastic and soya ink for its packaging.  And to offset their unavoidable carbon footprints, the company recently planted more than 2,300 mangrove and jackfruit trees in Jakarta; Semarang, Central Java; and Lampung.  “We believe the effort to save the environment is an effort to save ourselves,” Ratih added. “And as an industry player, we can create ripple effects by inspiring our customers and other business players [to be more environmentally friendly].”  Meanwhile, the packaging company SIG Combibloc Indonesia seeks to encourage Indonesian customers to sort and recycle their trash by setting up a drop-off point in Cibubur Junction, East Jakarta.  “Indonesia produces more than 19 tonnes of trash per year,” Noer Wellington, SIG head of market of Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Vietnam, said. “Five tonnes of which are plastic. And yet, 72 percent of the [Indonesian] population is not used to sorting and managing trash properly.”  People can bring their nonorganic waste to the drop-off point in exchange for reward points to accumulate to get some products.  “We’re adding fuel to the fire,” Noer said. “As customers are now getting more concerned with the environment, we’re encouraging a positive change of behavior by urging them to sort their trash and deliver it to the drop-off point.”  Becoming minimalists Besides being selective in buying products, more Indonesian customers are also adopting a minimalist lifestyle and buying only what is necessary.  “[Minimalism] is also part of conscious buying,” Didi, editor-in-chief of National Geographic Indonesia, said. “We should never purchase things we don’t need for the sake of keeping up.”  Caine Aurilia, a representative of the sustainable fashion movement Setali Indonesia, has practiced minimalism since early 2020.  “I haven’t bought any new clothes for three years now,” Caine said during an interview at Senayan City on March 25. “Any new clothes I have either come from donations or clothes exchanges between friends and family members.”  The slow-fashion enthusiast made this drastic commitment when she realized fashion is currently the third-largest polluting industry in the world and emits approximately 10 percent of global greenhouse gases.  Caine also shared tips on becoming a more conscious and environmentally responsible consumer.  “Before buying anything, make sure you know who produces them and what materials are being used in making them,” she said. “And also, are their workers being paid a fair wage?” In this digital era, this research can be done with a few clicks on your gadget.  “Above all, buy local,” Caine added. “It surely helps reduce your carbon footprints.” 

This article was published in thejakartapost.com with the title "". Click to read: https://www.thejakartapost.com/culture/2023/04/05/finally-responsible-indonesian-consumers-now-more-conscious-with-their-shopping.html.


 
Kompas 1
 
The Cost of Inaction: Failing to Act on Climate Change Threatens Asia and the Pacific
Without immediate and sustained action, Asia and the Pacific is set to experience unprecedented levels of warming, extreme weather, and economic devastation. Rising temperatures, stronger storms, and increased flooding are just some of the consequences of doing too little too late.
 Climate change is no longer an issue about the future. A substantial amount of climate change has already occurred, and the effects will continue to increase even if all greenhouse gas emissions were to stop immediately.
Global warming is a function of the stock of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. That stock takes time to respond to changes in the flow of emissions. For this reason, addressing most impacts of climate change in the coming decades depends on adaptation, even if mitigation is critical in the longer term.
As of mid-2024, the world’s atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) had reached 422 parts per million, which is 50% higher than the preindustrial level of around 280. Two-thirds of the increase has taken place since 1970 and the rate of increase has only accelerated over time. The world has not had the current level of CO2 concentrations for millions of years.
Since the middle of the 18th century, the world has emitted 1.5 trillion tons of CO2. Future CO2 emissions must be a small fraction of current levels to meet Paris Agreement climate goals, even with record global population and economic growth.
The year 2023 was already 1.46°C above preindustrial averages, and the World Meteorological Organization recently announced that 1.5 degrees of warming had been exceeded. The rate of temperature increase is also accelerating, with warming per year since 1982 three times faster than prior to that year. The 10 years from 2014–2023 were the 10 hottest years on record, and
February 2024 was the hottest month ever reported. 
Over longer timeframes, the impacts of climate change are conditioned by whether the world acts in line with Paris Agreement goals of limiting warming to well below 2°C above preindustrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5°C. Yet, even if strong action were taken, the climate will continue to warm for decades.  
Under currently implemented policies, warming of around 3°C is expected by 2100, not accounting for natural processes like thawing permafrost or warming oceans that could release more greenhouse gases and further increase temperatures.
Signs are emerging that the world could be reaching tipping points that can trigger these feedbacks. Tropical forests and peatlands have historically been major carbon sinks. However, increasing forest fires are releasing the stocks of CO2 that forests have stored and peatlands are emitting methane, turning them into emissions sources. 
In 2023, ecosystem sequestration of carbon slowed substantially. If natural emissions sinks continue to transform to emissions sources, high levels of warming may become impossible to avoid, and the world may end up on track to warming similar to what modelers have termed a high-end emissions scenario, rather than only 3°C of warming.
The evidence is clear that even current levels of greenhouse gases are already transforming our world in drastic and irreversible ways.
Were that to happen, the most dramatic changes will be heat waves. Historically, each year, Southeast Asia has had 20 days or fewer with the regional temperature at more than 35°C. Under 4.7°C of mean global warming, such days would exceed half a year by 2100. South Asia would have days exceeding 35°C rise from around 100 to about 200 days annually by 2100, East Asia from around 7 to nearly 50, and Central and West Asia from 10 to around 50. This would diminish labor productivity by up to 30% in high exposure sectors, while driving large increases in energy consumption for cooling.
Extreme storm events across Asia and the Pacific would increase in severity. From 1979 to 2016, cyclones in East Asia and Southeast Asia had a duration that grew by two hours to nine hours after making landfall, and they traveled around 100 kilometers further inland. Under a high-emissions climate scenario, continuation of this pattern would lead to a doubling of the destructive power of cyclones in Asia and the Pacific by 2100, which is much higher than the change expected globally. 
Sea level would rise by about 0.8 meters globally by 2100 under a high-end emissions scenario. Observed sea-level gauges show rates of relative sea-level rise in certain areas of Asia and the Pacific that are about double the global average, and internal climate variability is expected to amplify climate change effects in the region to well above those experienced globally. 
Instability at the Arctic and Antarctic creates additional uncertainty about the degree of sea-level increase, as accelerated melt of polar icecaps can increase this further. Under scenarios of sea ice instability, around 300 million people in Asia and the Pacific live in areas threatened by coastal inundation.
 Models reveal trillions of dollars in capital damage each year by sea-level rise, storm surges, and coastal flooding in Asia and the Pacific by 2070 under a high-end emissions scenario. The largest long-term damages are expected in the largest economies, while affected populations are concentrated in the People’s Republic of China, India, Bangladesh and Viet Nam. Affected populations triple by 2050 and reach over 50 million annually by 2070. Damages rise by many times to reach a median value of $3 trillion annually by 2070.
Intensified and more variable rainfall, along with more extreme storms, would bring increasing landslides and floods. This will be caused by overflow of rivers and from intense rainfall leading to water stagnation. Leading models also show trillions of dollars of annual capital damage from riverine flooding in Asia and the Pacific by 2070, with 110 million people potentially affected on average each year under a high-end emission scenario.
Climate effects on agriculture, fisheries, and forestry will disproportionately affect poor and vulnerable communities. Most poor people in the Asia and Pacific region depend on agriculture for livelihoods, and food accounts for most of their consumption, so climate-related impacts on the sector will disproportionately harm the most vulnerable. 
The effects on the economies of Asia and the Pacific could be profound.  We find in our recent modeling that impacts of climate change under a high emissions scenario, counting from a 2020 base would lead to 17% GDP loss in the region by 2070. The overall number masks heterogeneity in the region, as vulnerable countries could lose up to 30% of GDP. By 2100, those relationships suggest that 41% of GDP could be lost at the regional level, with vulnerable countries losing up to 78% of GDP.
These are only the more understood risks. The unknown risks of climate change to ecosystem integrity, ecosystem services, and climatic stability could cause losses to be far higher.  The evidence is clear that even current levels of greenhouse gases are already transforming our world in drastic and irreversible ways.
Ignoring this reality not only accelerates warming but also deepens the vulnerability of billions of people, especially in regions like Asia and the Pacific, where rising seas, extreme weather, and agricultural impacts could devastate lives and economies.
Every day that we do not act will only make these impacts worse.
https://blogs.adb.org/blog/cost-inaction-failing-act-climate-change-threatens-asia-and-pacific/
 
Kompas 2
 
5 Impacts Felt Due to Climate Change

Climate change is a significant change that occurs in climate, air temperature, and rainfall ranging from 10 to millions of years. The impact of climate change can be felt in various fields. Starting from the environment, health, to the economy. Continuous temperature increases can cause weather patterns to change and disrupt the balance of nature. This condition can trigger risks for all creatures on earth. Climate change can have a very broad impact on people's lives. The increase in temperature on earth not only affects the temperature of the earth, but can also change the climate system. That is what can affect various aspects of natural changes and human life. Such as the quality and quality of water, forests, habitats, agricultural land, health, and also coastal ecosystems. The following are the impacts felt by all creatures on earth if climate change occurs.

1. Affects water quality and quantity Too much rainfall can cause a decrease in the quality of water sources. In addition, rising temperatures can also cause chlorine levels in clean water. In addition, global warming can also increase the amount of water in the atmosphere, which can then increase rainfall. Although increased rainfall can increase clean water sources, excessive rainfall can result in a high probability of water returning directly to the sea, without being stored in clean water sources for human use. 2. Habitat changes and species extinction Global warming, rising sea levels, flooding and storms due to climate change. This will bring about a significant change in the habitat as a natural home for various species of animals, plants, and other organisms. In addition, habitat changes will also cause extinction of various species. Both in animals and plants, such as large trees in the forest that have the main function as the main absorber of carbon dioxide. This is also because they do not have time to adapt to changes in temperature and changes in nature that are too fast. The extinction of these various species will have a greater impact on the ecosystem and food chain. 3. Decreasing quality and quantity of forests The existence of forest fires is one of the impacts of climate change. As the lungs of the earth, forests are producers of Oxygen ()2), in addition, forests can also help in absorbing greenhouse gases that can cause global warming. Read as many books as you like at Gramedia Digital Premium Trees that die due to changes in forest use or because they dry out due to increased temperatures in climate change. Will release carbon dioxide. In addition, the death of trees causes a reduction in carbon dioxide absorption. Thus, carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases will increase drastically. 4. Increase disease outbreaks When rainfall increases, it can increase the spread of deadly diseases, such as malaria, cholera, and dengue fever. This can happen because mosquitoes carrying these viruses live and breed in hot and humid weather. These conditions are caused by climate change. Ozone depletion can also increase the intensity of ultraviolet rays that can cause skin cancer, cataracts, and decreased immunity. That is what can make us susceptible to disease. 5. Decreasing agricultural productivity Excessive heat, natural disasters, and lack of water availability are caused by weather changes that can damage agricultural land. Excessive heat and dwindling water supplies will hamper agricultural productivity, climate change can also cause changes in planting and harvesting times. In addition, it can also cause the emergence of hana and disease outbreaks in plants. Although many people do not really understand about climate change, everyone is also aware of the impacts felt due to this phenomenon. Increasingly hot air, frequent disasters due to rainfall, rising sea levels and unpredictable seasons. These are all examples of the effects felt by society due to climate change. All about climate change is discussed in the book Disaster Risk: Assessment of Vulnerability, Capacity and Mapping of Climate Change Impacts . In this book you will find a review of climate change that is happening globally. Also accompanied by efforts to prevent and reduce the rate of climate change known as mitigation efforts. It is also equipped with information on ways to adapt to changes in environmental conditions that can occur due to climate change. You can order and buy this book directly through gramedia.com . In addition, there are free discount vouchers that you can use without a minimum purchase. Come on, buy the books above with more savings! Click here to get the voucher.

Artikel ini telah tayang di Kompas.com dengan judul "5 Impacts Felt Due to Climate Change", Klik untuk baca: https://buku.kompas.com/read/2928/5-dampak-yang-dirasakan-akibat-terjadinya-perubahan-iklim.




Kompas 3
 
Impact of Climate Change, Temperature in Japan Reaches 38 Degrees Celsius

KOMPAS.com - The temperature in Japan has been increasing for some time now, with temperatures in some areas reaching more than 38 degrees Celsius.  According to the Ministry of Environment in Japan, as quoted from the Japan Times, Tuesday (18/7/2023), the high temperatures were caused by human-induced climate change. 
Days with extreme high temperatures are predicted to continue as the earth warms.  According to the Japan Meteorological Agency, the highest temperature was recorded on Tuesday (11/7/2023) in Yamanashi Prefecture at 16:00 local time, with a temperature of 38 degrees Celsius. In other areas, the highest temperature in Tokyo was felt in Ome City which reached 35.8 degrees Celsius, while the temperature in central Tokyo reached 34.3 degrees Celsius. No Electric Luggage Allowed Outside Osaka Airport Kompas.id Article In Hotayama, Saitama Prefecture, a temperature of 37 degrees Celsius was recorded, while in Ushiku, Chiba Prefecture, the highest temperature was 36.4 degrees Celsius.
Due to the heat that hit Japan, there were around 167 people in Tokyo who were rushed to the hospital on Monday (10/7/2023). This number was recorded as the highest number throughout 2023. Since Monday (3/7/2023) there have been around 3,964 patients rushed to hospital by ambulance for the same cause. As of Tuesday afternoon (11/7/2023), 20 prefectures in Japan were under a "Heatstroke Warning Alert" condition.
The impact of climate change is not only happening in Japan, but also in Italy. Quoted from the ABC News page , Sunday (16/7/2023), the Italian Ministry of Health issued a warning for 16 cities, including Rome, Bologna, and Florence. Italians are being urged to prepare for the most intense heatwave of the summer and one of the most intense ever.

Artikel ini telah tayang di Kompas.com dengan judul "Impact of Climate Change, Temperature in Japan Reaches 38 Degrees Celsius", Klik untuk baca: https://travel.kompas.com/read/2023/07/18/151200127/dampak-perubahan-iklim-suhu-di-jepang-capai-38-derajat-celsius?utm_source=Whatsapp&utm_medium=Referral&utm_campaign=Top_Mobile%20Kompascom+%20baca%20berita%20tanpa%20iklan:%20https://kmp.im/plus3%20Download%20aplikasi:%20https://kmp.im/app3.



 
Kompas 4
 
Protecting the Environment & Fighting Climate Change
Prayer and the belief in a supernatural, all-powerful being won't stop the destruction of the environment or the advancement of climate change. Only science and action will!




The scientific evidence that climate change is real and is driven by human activity is indisputable (see the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report for details):
* The ten hottest years on record have all occurred since 1998. The years 2016 and 2020 are the two hottest years to date.
* Over the past century, sea levels have risen about 6 inches and the rise in sea level is accelerating.
* Artic sea ice coverage has diminished each year for the past three decades.
* Ocean temperatures have been rising over the past 20 years, damaging coral reefs and threatening marine ecosystems.
* Glaciers are melting at an accelerating rate.
* Climate changes have caused hurricanes to slow down over the past half century, increasing rainfall and storm surge.
* Heatwaves, droughts and wildfires are increasing in frequency and severity.
Check this link for more detail: https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/.




Climate change is driven by the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas), coupled with human population growth.
* Greehouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane are largely responsible for global warming.
* The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased by nearly 50% since the beginning of the industrial revolution in the 1800s.
* The human population, which reached 1 billion at the beginning of the 19th century, now stands at 7.6 billion and is expected to rise to 9.8 billion by 2050. Human population growth is driving the increase in the burning of fossil fuels and the generation of greehouse gases linked to agriculture.




The impacts of global warming, climate change and the continued growth in human population include:
* Continued rise in sea levels and increased coastal flooding.
* More destructive hurricanes and other storms.
* Longer and more destructive wildfire seasons.
* More frequent and intense heat waves.
* More severe droughts in some areas and greater flooding in others.
* Diminishing supplies of ground water in many areas.
* Increased destruction of coral reefs and marine habitats in our oceans.
* Increasing threats to agricultural production and food supplies.
* Increased threats to human health from the spread of disease carrying insects and an increase in polluted air as atmospheric temperatures continue to climb.
* Plants and animals, which are already experiencing the 6th mass extinction in the history of the planet, will experience further increases in their rates of extinction.
What you can do to combat climate change:
* 1. Estimate your own carbon footprint.
* 2. Recycle and reduce food waste.
* 3. Repair vs. buying new.
* 4. Convert to a higher mileage or electric vehicle.
* 5. Eat less meat.
* 6. Install solar panels on your home.
* 7. Use walking, cycling and public transporation in lieu of your car.
* 8. Fly less.
* 9. Contact government officials and business leaders to voice your concern and call for action.
https://www.thesecularcommunity.org/environment.html?gad_source=5&gclid=EAIaIQobChMI_rORmuvtiwMVtJhQBh18ajwGEAAYBCAAEgIPQ_D_BwE
 
 
tempo 1
 
Fighting Climate Change, ITS Holds Tree Planting Action Attended by 8 Thousand Participants
Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology (ITS) held the ITS Climate Action (ICA) activity on Saturday, August 12, 2023.
TEMPO.CO , Jakarta - Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember ( ITS ) held the ITS Climate Action (ICA) activity on Saturday, August 12, 2023. ITS Chancellor Mochamad Ashari explained that this activity was part of ITS's 63rd Dies Natalis and a form of ITS's concern for climate change.
"Everyone must know the world's current needs to contribute to fighting climate change," he said as reported on the ITS website on Sunday, August 13, 2023.
The Electrical Engineering lecturer added that ITS' concern for the environment is more than just ICA. According to him, ITS also contributes to research that also aims to combat climate change, such as research and development of electric vehicles that do not emit greenhouse gases. The Head of the 63rd ITS Dies Natalis Committee, I Ketut Eddy Purnama, explained that the ICA event was carried out in the form of tree planting. This is expected to reduce the carbon footprint to combat climate change.
This activity is expected to create a cleaner ITS environment and a more comfortable learning atmosphere. "More than 60 trees planted are a collaboration between ITS and Grab Indonesia and Virama Karya," he said.
At the same time, the Chancellor of ITS and the Mayor of Surabaya, Eri Cahyadi launched the Eklim application which can be accessed by everyone through the page eklim.its.ac.id. The eklim application consists of four activities that can be followed, namely mass clean-up, tree planting, cycling, and healthy walking. These cycling and healthy walking activities invite all residents to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles.
Until the event was closed at 11.00 WIB, at least 8,392 people were recorded as having participated in this event. They consisted of new students who participated in the series of events of the Integralistic Generation (Gerigi) 2023, alumni, lecturers, and education staff.
Waste collected from this activity will be further processed by the ITS Environmental Engineering Department. This activity is expected to set a record for the Indonesian World Record Museum (MURI) as a mass clean-up activity with the most participants in Indonesia.
https://www.tempo.co/politik/lawan-perubahan-iklim-its-gelar-aksi-tanam-pohon-diikuti-8-ribu-peserta-156418
 
 
tempo 2
 
Indonesia Takes Concrete Steps to Tackle Climate Change, Environment Minister
TEMPO.CO, Jakarta - Minister of Environment and Forestry Siti Nurbaya Bakar claimed that Indonesia has taken concrete steps to tackle climate change. 
"We are no longer acting like other countries with their mere commitment and ambitions," she said during a visit to the Indonesian Pavilion at COP28 in Dubai, UAE, on Wednesday, Nov. 29.
According to the minister, other countries reduced GHG emissions by 43 percent on average while Indonesia managed to reduce emissions by 52 percent in 2020, then 43 percent in 2021, and 42 percent in 2022.
"Indonesia is actually included in the list of countries managing to ambitiously reduce GHG emissions," she added.
However, despite the significant level of emissions reduction, the government is still working hard to keep suppressing emissions from the coastline ecosystem, Minister Siti Nurbaya said. The ecosystem includes mangroves, seagrass beds, and coral reefs.
Additionally, the ministry also stated that the farming sector also contributed to emissions due to livestock secretions and plowing agricultural lands. 
"For now, we are targeting [emissions reduction] this year for 43.2 percent. Next year, based on our calculation, the target will surely surpass 43.2 percent," she concluded.
https://en.tempo.co/read/1803319/indonesia-takes-concrete-steps-to-tackle-climate-change-environment-minister
 
 
tempo 3
 
4 Effects of Climate Change on Indonesia's Environment
TEMPO.CO, Jakarta - Climate change has far-reaching impacts around the globe, with considerably high environmental damage affecting Indonesia as an archipelago country. A scientific journal entitled "Impact of Climate Change in Indonesia" wrote that climate change in all parts of Indonesia generally made the air temperature rise at a lower rate than in other places. In the southern region of Indonesia, rainfall will decrease while rainfall in the northern region will increase.
Human activities such as urbanization, deforestation, and industrialization tend to drive climate change. There are also external factors from nature such as continental drifts, volcanic eruptions, changes in the earth's orbit around the sun, sun spots, and El Nino. The following are the recorded effects of climate change in Indonesia:
Lower Water Quality and Quantity 
Citing ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id, the amount of water atmosphere will increase due to the increasingly massive global warming so that rainfall increases. High rainfall allows water to return to the sea, without being stored in clean water sources for human use, apart from the positive impact of high rainfall on increasing the amount of clean water.
Water quality due to high rainfall and rising temperatures makes the chlorine levels in clean water. The main function of chlorine is to inhibit growth and eradicate bacteria and various types of microbes.
Health and Behavior
Citing the Climate Change Knowledge Center page, climate change that creates a prolonged dry season leads to the development of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. This happens because the situation in the air humidity in the dry season is quite high.
This situation will also cause disease in humans because of the increasing number of bacteria in the air. For example, on the skin, the fungus will easily stick and be dangerous for people who are allergic to small objects such as flower pollen. As a result, allergic diseases are increasing.
In urban areas, air fumes from industrial products and vehicles have an impact on human respiratory health. In this condition, various problems such as respiratory infections will often be found.
Fisherman to Face Scarce Catches 
The sharp change in weather allows the number of fish in the sea to decline sharply. As a result, fishermen find it difficult to catch fish in the sea, so fishermen's income will decrease. They need to consider building cold storage for fish storage to anticipate uncertain weather. This also means that the government needs to help to provide support for fishermen.
Cause Psychological Disease
Citing dlh.semarangkota.go.id, climate change due to extreme weather changes will also cause disturbances such as psychological diseases. Those in areas prone to natural disasters or affected by their work will experience their own trauma that causes psychological illness.
https://en.tempo.co/read/1621715/4-effects-of-climate-change-on-indonesias-environment
 
 
tempo 4
 
Climate Change: Number of Days Over 35 C Surges in World's Scorching Capitals
TEMPO.CO, Jakarta - The number of days reaching a sizzling 35 degrees Celsius (95 Fahrenheit) in 20 of the world's largest capitals - from Delhi to Jakarta to Buenos Aires - has risen 52% over the past three decades, a think tank analysis found on Friday, June 28.
More than 300 million people live in the world's 20 most populous capital cities, where they are uniquely vulnerable to rising temperatures fueled by climate change, as asphalt and buildings absorb and retain heat.
Capital cities including Delhi, Dhaka and Manila already this year have been plagued by dangerous heatwaves - leading to a spate of heat-related deaths and school closures.
Delhi alone documented its longest and most severe heatwave in 74 years, registering 39 consecutive days with maximum temperatures at or above 40 C (104 F) from May 14 to June 21, according to weather station data.
Now, an analysis by the London-based International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), quantifies the growing threat of extreme heat in some of the world's largest urban centers.
Using surface temperature data from airport weather stations, the researchers found that from 2014 to 2023, there were nearly 6,500 cumulative days, or instances, when one of the 20 cities reached temperatures of 35 C or higher. In the decade from 1994 to 2003, there were just 4,755.
"We know that hot weather is not felt evenly across cities," said Tucker Landesman, a researcher with IIED. "Pockets of extreme heat are more likely in certain types of neighborhoods and commercial districts. This is tied to inequality and how we design buildings and public infrastructure."
Indonesia's Jakarta experienced the greatest absolute rise in the number of days over 35 C, from 28 days between 1994 and 2003 to 167 in the most recent decade.
Seoul, South Korea, went from nine days to 58, while Buenos Aires went from seven days to 35.
https://en.tempo.co/read/1885056/climate-change-number-of-days-over-35-c-surges-in-worlds-scorching-capitals
 
the hindu 1
 
Is climate change affecting global health?
Why is the world’s reliance on fossil fuels increasing the prevalence of disease, food insecurity and other illnesses related to heat? According to a Lancet report, how are changing weather events impacting lives? What action is required to stop the crisis from causing further damage?
The story so far: Even as countries are meeting at the ongoing Climate Change Conference (COP27) in Egypt, a recent report by Lancet, has traced in detail the intimate link between changing weather events and their impact on the health of people. The 2022 Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change: Health at the Mercy of Fossil Fuels points out that the world’s reliance on fossil fuels increases the risk of disease, food insecurity and other illnesses related to heat. For long, much of the world believed that those predicting the harmful effects of climate change were part of a doomsday cult with a touch of the dramatic. It is now increasingly clear that the deleterious effects of climate change not only have the potential to severely disrupt life, but that they are already upon us. Climate change is not an isolated incident or occurrence, but a global phenomenon, leaving its impact on almost every aspect of life, sweeping in its train nations across the world, irrespective of whether they contributed to it or not. The 2022 Lancet Countdown report comes at a time when the world is face-to-face with the threat of climate change. It says: “Countries and health systems continue to contend with the health, social, and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, while Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and persistent fossil fuel overdependence has pushed the world into global energy and cost-of-living crises. As these crises unfold, climate change escalates unabated. Its worsening impacts are increasingly affecting the foundations of human health and wellbeing, exacerbating the vulnerability of the world’s populations to concurrent health threats.”
https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/is-climate-change-affecting-global-health/article66141997.ece
 
 
the hindu 2
 
Explained | Himachal floods: a man-made disaster?
Why is climate change alone not to blame for unprecedented rain and floods in the State? What are the anthropogenic reasons? Should the development model be relooked? How have changes in the way dams are being built, shift in crop patterns, rush of tourism added to the problem?
The story so far: Flash floods during this year’s monsoon season have caused unprecedented damage to both lives and assets in Himachal Pradesh. The death toll has crossed 150, and the estimated total loss amounts to ₹10,000 crore. Although climate change is expected to have played a hand in causing the high precipitation leading to these flash floods, human induced disasters resulting from planned development have played a significant role in causing such colossal losses. In the last five years (before 2022), 1,550 people lost their lives and nearly 12,444 houses were damaged. The IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) VI report has clearly stated that the Himalayas and coastal regions of India will be the hardest hit by climate change. In the Himalayas, there is a noticeable pattern of increased precipitation occurring in shorter periods of time. The India Meteorological Department data shows that the normal rainfall during this period is expected to be between 720mm and 750 mm. However, in certain instances, it has exceeded 888 mm in 2010 and 926.9 mm in 2018. This year, the precipitation so far has been attributed to the combined effect of the south-west monsoon with western disturbances. The total rainfall from June to date was 511 mm.
https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/explained-himachal-floods-a-man-made-disaster/article67121119.ece
 
 
the hindu 3
 
Is climate change making tropical storms more frequent? Scientists say it’s unclear
How much is climate change responsible for the appearance of four tropical cyclones at the same time in the West Pacific for the first time since 1961?
An unusual cluster of typhoons in the West Pacific and a series of powerful hurricanes in the Atlantic are raising questions about the impact that climate change is having on tropical storms across the globe. As nations thrashed out the details of a new climate financing package at COP29 talks in Azerbaijan, the Philippines was hit by its sixth deadly typhoon in a month while the United States was recovering from two devastating hurricanes. Scientists say it remains unclear how much climate change is reshaping the storm season, or if it is responsible for the rare appearance of four tropical cyclones at the same time in the West Pacific — the first time this has happened in November since 1961. Higher sea surface temperatures speed up evaporation and provide additional “fuel” for tropical cyclones, boosting rainfall and wind speeds, they say.
And the latest assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), published in 2023, expressed “high confidence” global warming would make storms more intense.
The Philippines’ latest supertyphoon Man-Yi landed on Saturday, forcing the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of residents. At least eight people died on Monday, adding to a death toll of more than 160 since October.
“It is rare to see a cluster of four tropical cyclones in the western north Pacific at the same time,” said Feng Xiangbo, a tropical storm researcher at Britain’s University of Reading.
“(But) blaming climate change ... for this unprecedented event this week is not straightforward,” he added.
Evidence suggests that while climate change is increasing storm intensity, it has also reduced their frequency, especially during what is typically the late season from October to November, Feng said.
This year, atmospheric waves that have recently been active near the equator could be an alternative explanation for the unusual uptick, Feng said, but their relationship with climate change is unclear.
The belt of high pressure known as the sub-tropical ridge, part of the global atmospheric circulation system, has been stronger and stretched further north and west than usual, according to Choy Chun Win, Senior Scientific Officer at the Hong Kong Observatory.
The ridge could have steered the storms in a westerly direction, diverting them away from cooler waters and wind shears, which would normally weaken them, providing an explanation why four could coexist, he said.
 Credit: Reuters
An unusual cluster of typhoons in the West Pacific and a series of powerful hurricanes in the Atlantic are raising questions about the impact that climate change is having on tropical storms across the globe.
As nations thrashed out the details of a new climate financing package at COP29 talks in Azerbaijan, the Philippines was hit by its sixth deadly typhoon in a month while the United States was recovering from two devastating hurricanes.
Scientists say it remains unclear how much climate change is reshaping the storm season, or if it is responsible for the rare appearance of four tropical cyclones at the same time in the West Pacific — the first time this has happened in November since 1961.
 
Higher sea surface temperatures speed up evaporation and provide additional “fuel” for tropical cyclones, boosting rainfall and wind speeds, they say.
And the latest assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), published in 2023, expressed “high confidence” global warming would make storms more intense.
The Philippines’ latest supertyphoon Man-Yi landed on Saturday, forcing the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of residents. At least eight people died on Monday, adding to a death toll of more than 160 since October.
“It is rare to see a cluster of four tropical cyclones in the western north Pacific at the same time,” said Feng Xiangbo, a tropical storm researcher at Britain’s University of Reading.
“(But) blaming climate change ... for this unprecedented event this week is not straightforward,” he added.
Evidence suggests that while climate change is increasing storm intensity, it has also reduced their frequency, especially during what is typically the late season from October to November, Feng said.
This year, atmospheric waves that have recently been active near the equator could be an alternative explanation for the unusual uptick, Feng said, but their relationship with climate change is unclear.
The belt of high pressure known as the sub-tropical ridge, part of the global atmospheric circulation system, has been stronger and stretched further north and west than usual, according to Choy Chun Win, Senior Scientific Officer at the Hong Kong Observatory.
The ridge could have steered the storms in a westerly direction, diverting them away from cooler waters and wind shears, which would normally weaken them, providing an explanation why four could coexist, he said.
“However, more research is required to assess the contribution of climate change to the chance occurrence of the multiple tropical cyclones and the longer tropical cyclone season,” he added.
Ben Clarke, weather researcher with London’s Grantham Institute on Climate Change and Environment, said it “would make sense” that rising ocean temperatures would extend the typhoon season, but the evidence is not conclusive.
“There has been a clear recent increase in the number of tropical cyclones affecting the Philippines in its less active season from approximately December to February, but this doesn’t tell us much about ... June-November,” he said.
Stronger hurricanes
In an analysis published on Wednesday, U.S. weather researchers Climate Central said Atlantic hurricanes have intensified significantly this year as a result of record-breaking ocean warming.
Since 2019, warmer temperatures have driven average wind speeds up by 18 miles per hour (29 kph) and pushed three hurricanes into the highest Category 5, the study said.
The two deadly Category 5 hurricanes known as Helene and Milton, which hit Florida in September and October respectively, would have been unlikely without climate change, it said.
Research is still ongoing on whether tropical cyclones are becoming more frequent, but there is high scientific confidence that warmer sea temperatures are driving up rainfall and causing higher storm surges, said Daniel Gilford, Climate Central’s lead hurricane researcher.
“While other factors contribute to each storm’s strength, the impacts of elevated sea surface temperatures are prominent and significant,” he said.
“In the Atlantic, more than 80% of storms since 2019 were clearly influenced by warm ocean temperatures caused by carbon pollution.”
https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/is-climate-change-making-tropical-storms-more-frequent-scientists-say-its-unclear/article68890752.ece
 
 
the hindu 4
 
Data | Earth records its warmest ever July in 2021
If current climate change policies continue as they are, the global surface temperature is estimated to increase by 2.7-3.1°C by 2100 compared to pre-industrial levels
A recent IPCC report had issued a strong warning about an impending climate crisis, attributing rising wildfires, heatwaves, extreme rainfall and floods to human activity. The report advised deep cuts to CO 2 emissions, failing which the rising temperatures will lead to permanent damage. Data show that July 2021 was the hottest July in the last 142 years for which data are available. And the temperature rise is not limited to a region — every continent has recorded peak levels in the last 10 years. Asia recorded its warmest ever July in 2021.
The global surface temperature in July 2021 was 0.93°C more than the 20th century (1901-2000) average of 15.8°C. It is the highest deviation from the average for any July in the past 142 years. In the Julys of 2016, 2019 and 2020, it had deviated to 0.92°C from the average. Nine of the 10 warmest Julys ever have been recorded since 2010. The chart shows the temperature change in July from the 20th century average.
     
https://www.thehindu.com/data/data-earth-records-its-warmest-ever-july-in-2021/article61427964.ece
 
 
 
 
 
 


Times of india 2
Monsoon fury 2023: Climate change makes extreme events new normal


India's battle with extreme weather events has reached alarming proportions as the nation faces the wrath of the  monsoon  season.
The onset of 2023 was marked by scorching temperatures that shattered a 123-year-old record in February. The months that followed saw the intensification of extreme weather events. Scientists have identified the influence of climate change in exacerbating these occurrences, with April and June experiencing a heatwave that was made 30 times more likely due to global warming.


The Arabian Sea witnessed the formation of cyclone Biparjoy, which lasted a staggering 13 days, becoming the longest-duration cyclone since 1977. This exceptional event underscored the changing patterns of weather systems driven by climate change. In fact, the year 2023 has witnessed a series of unprecedented climatic phenomena, indicating a disturbing new normal caused by climate change.
At present, Northwest India is grappling with the aftermath of incessant and torrential rainfall. Flash floods and landslides have wreaked havoc across Himachal Pradesh, while Delhi recorded the highest rainfall in four decades. Experts, including meteorologists and climate scientists, unanimously attribute the surge in extreme weather events to the escalating levels of global warming.
Mahesh Palawat, Vice-President of Meteorology and Climate Change at Skymet Weather, explained, "The ongoing spell of extremely heavy rains is due to the alignment of three weather systems: the Western Disturbance over the Western Himalayas, the cyclonic circulation over the northwestern plains, and the Axis of Monsoon trough running across the Indo-Gangetic Plains. While this alignment is not unprecedented, the impact of climate change has amplified the intensity of these events."
Numerous reports and research studies have already established the profound impact of climate change on Indian monsoon patterns. However, scientists have also identified other factors that are compounding the implications of global warming.
Dr. Raghu Murtugudde, an Earth System Scientist and Visiting Professor at IIT-Bombay, elaborated on these factors, stating, "Apart from global warming, other contributors to extreme weather events in 2023 include the El Nino phenomenon, larger areas affected by wildfires releasing increased carbon into the atmosphere, warmer phases in the North Atlantic Ocean, and exceptional warming in the Arabian Sea. Additionally, unusual upper-level circulation patterns are affecting local surface circulations, resulting in the heavy rains witnessed across north and central India."
The Ministry of Earth Sciences report, 'Assessment of Climate Change over the Indian Region,' highlights that future monsoonal rainfall is projected to become more intense and affect larger areas due to increased atmospheric moisture content resulting from temperature rise. The frequency of localized heavy rainfall occurrences has significantly increased over central India, attributed in part to changes in moisture availability due to greenhouse gas-induced warming, aerosols, atmospheric stability, and urbanization. Global and regional models also predict increased seasonal mean rainfall over India, along with a weakening monsoon circulation.
The rise in average temperatures, decreased monsoon precipitation, increased frequency of extreme temperature and rainfall events, droughts, rising sea levels, and intensified cyclones observed since the mid-twentieth century serve as compelling scientific evidence of the influence of human activities on regional climate changes.
Krishnan Raghavan, Scientist-G and Director of the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), emphasized the significance of increased evaporation resulting from rising global surface and ocean temperatures. He explained, "The Indo-Gangetic plains receive significant moisture from the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. This continuous moisture supply contributes to increased rainfall, ultimately leading to extreme weather events."
Dr. Raghavan further highlighted the need for research on other global factors that impact circulations affecting Indian weather. "Arctic amplification, characterized by the alarming heating of polar regions and subsequent glacial ice melt, can significantly influence mid-latitude and tropical atmospheric circulation patterns. Although further research is required, we cannot disregard its potential contribution to changing weather patterns in India," he said.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, 'Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate,' had already warned of increased summer and monsoon precipitation, along with a 20 percent surge in extreme rainfall events on the Indian subcontinent. The report projected incessant and erratic rainfall leading to floods, intensified cyclonic events, and higher likelihoods of unprecedented extreme events with increased intensities, durations, and spatial extents.
The warming of the western Indian Ocean has been linked to a surge in moisture surges on low-level monsoon westerlies toward the Indian subcontinent, resulting in an increase in precipitation extremes over central India. Central India has experienced a significant increase in heavy rainfall (over 100 mm per day) and a notable decrease in moderate rainfall (5–100 mm per day) during the South Asian monsoon season. Flood frequency and magnitude have increased in southeastern and northern Asia, including India.
Analyses conducted by the Council on Energy, Environment, and Water (CEEW) indicate that India has witnessed over 478 extreme events since 1970, with a notable acceleration in their frequency after 2005. The period from 1970 to 2005 recorded an average of 250 extreme events, while the post-2005 period witnessed a surge to 310 extreme events and associated occurrences. These empirical findings align with the weakening of monsoons due to rising micro-temperatures.
The impact of these abrupt climate shifts extends beyond the frequency of events, with the intensity of associated occurrences skyrocketing. The compounding effects of climate change pose unprecedented challenges to human and natural ecosystems, impacting economic activities and posing severe threats to livelihoods.
While efforts to combat climate change have escalated at regional, national, and subnational levels, the rapid compounding of climate change impacts necessitates urgent and comprehensive action. Without a concerted global response, India and other nations will continue to bear the brunt of extreme weather events, risking lives, infrastructure, and socio-economic stability.


https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/monsoon-fury-2023-climate-change-makes-extreme-events-new-normal/articleshow/101667866.cms


Times of india 3
India suffered 8% GDP loss in 2022 because of climate change 
In a stark revelation just ahead of COP28, a report by the University of Delaware's Gerard J. Mangone Climate Change Science and Policy Hub exposes the tangible economic toll of climate change, with developing nations absorbing the majority of the blow. Published under the title "Loss and Damage Today: How Climate Change is impacting output and capital," the report delves into the intricate web of global economic losses incurred due to climate change.
Globally, climate change has inflicted a population-weighted GDP loss of 6.3% in 2022. The unweighted percentage of global GDP lost is estimated at 1.8%, equivalent to approximately $1.5 trillion. This discrepancy underscores the disproportionate impact, concentrated in low-income countries and tropical regions, where populations are dense, and GDP is scarce.
The report singles out India, revealing an 8% GDP loss in 2022 compared to a hypothetical world without climate change. Over the same period, India has witnessed a cumulative decrease of 7.9% in capital wealth, primarily attributed to climate impacts on human-produced capital, such as infrastructure. The total economic loss over the 30 years since the Rio Convention is staggering, estimated at $3555 billion.
Dr. James Rising, the author of the study and Assistant Professor at the University of Delaware emphasises the urgent need for support to address the challenges faced by countries grappling with the economic fallout from climate change. He states, "The world is trillions of dollars poorer because of climate change, and most of that burden has fallen on poor countries. I hope that this information can clarify the challenges that many countries already face today and the support they urgently need to address them."
The report also underscores the exacerbation of global inequalities, with high-income countries currently reaping net GDP gains, largely attributed to reduced winter chill. However, as the planet continues to warm, these benefits are expected to diminish, with the adverse effects of hotter summers offsetting the advantages of milder winters.
The analysis, drawing on 58 economic models and utilizing machine learning, offers a "best estimate" of the current GDP and capital wealth losses from climate change. It sheds light on the intricate dynamics between climate change, economic outcomes, and capital investments. Low and middle-income countries face substantial capital losses, amounting to $2.1 trillion, posing long-term challenges to their economic resilience and growth.
When GDP and capital losses are amalgamated, the analysis reveals that low and middle-income countries have suffered a staggering total loss of $21 trillion since the adoption of the Rio Convention in 1992. Notably, all UNFCCC party groupings, except for the EU, have experienced total losses, with the G-77 bearing the greatest losses at $29 trillion. The report acknowledges these estimates as conservative, as certain impact channels and non-market losses are excluded from the analysis. As the world convenes for COP28, the report serves as a stark reminder of the pressing need for global cooperation to address the economic fallout of climate change.




https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/india-suffered-8-gdp-loss-in-2022-because-of-climate-change-study/articleshow/105633997.cms


Times of india 4
The Climate change continuum
March 5, 2024, 4:11 PM IST Akanksha Sharma in In the name of 'Development', Lifestyle, TOI
Our planet’s climate has undergone natural cycles and variations since its inception. In fact, over the last 800,000 years, there have been eight cycles of cold and warm phases, with the closing of the last ice age marking the beginning of the modern climate era. However, the changes observed over the past century are particularly intriguing, characterized by an accelerated and rather irreversible implosion of climate dynamics owing to an anthropogenic spike in greenhouse gas emissions. The consequences have grim manifestations through rising temperatures, intense extreme weather events, shifting seasons, and ecological disruptions. Unsurprisingly, the World Meteorological Organisation observes that 2023 has shattered all climate records with its implications, leaving communities shattered and in despair. 
But how did this disposition of humankind unfold and where are we headed?
Historically, the shifting temperature patterns extending over millennia have been predominantly driven by subtle oscillations in Earth’s solar orbit, axis tilt, and wobble influencing the seasonal distribution of sunlight received. Earth’s climate history over the last 800,000 years, compiled from ancient ice cores, ocean sediments, fossil reefs, lake beds, and tree rings, conclusively proved the existence of these shifts and their criticality to the sustenance of life on this planet. For instance, the Holocene epoch created a stable and hospitable climate backdrop for human civilization to thrive. 
Traces of climate consciousness and its connection with human existence have been found since the writings of ancient Greek scholars like Theophrastus and Vitruvius. However, it wasn’t till the industrial age commencing in the mid-18th century that climate stability underwent severe strain. The spike of an average of 1°C in global temperatures since industrialization resulting from the emergence of large economic systems built with fossil fuel as their foundation stands in sharp contrast to the modest temperature gradients occurring over the last six and a half millennia. It is only ironic that the scientific probe for climate change also came into the fore almost concurrently with Joseph Fourier proposing the existence of the greenhouse effect in 1824 and Svante Arrhenius first associating global warming to a hypothetical doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide in 1896. 
However, in the 21st century, climate change is no longer a hypothesis but a kafkaesque reality that communities must endure daily, thanks to the extractivist nature of modern economic models. In a world where receding glaciers, melting Siberian permafrost, and thermal disruption of biogeochemical cycles in flora and fauna are no longer science fiction, this UN research using decadal data captures the tragedy in totality, estimating that between 1970-2021, extreme weather events compounded by human-induced global warming have caused USD 4.3 trillion in economic damages. Viewed on a human scale, the picture looks even more appalling, revealing over 2 million deaths. Further, the Lancet observes that climate change is accelerating the spread of infectious diseases, putting populations at high risk. For instance, between 2012 and 2021, the number of months suitable for malaria transmission in the African highlands increased by 31%. 
However, the real tribulation of climate change is the frittering of climate justice as those who are least culpable come to bear its burden. A Stanford study notes that since the 1960s, climate change has widened the economic divergence between the global hemispheres by at least 25%. The fallout of climate change is only amplified with devastating rippling effects for developing countries and small island nations already battling with limitations inherent to their socio-economic, political, and cultural landscapes and lacking climate resilience. The World Bank notes that more than 140 million economically disadvantaged people across Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Latin America will become climate refugees by 2050 due to rising sea levels, severe water shortages, and compromised agricultural productivity.  
But, dwindling global food security, crumbling supply chains, flooding of coastal cities, and diseases moving north means that countries, communities, and companies across the developed world are also at risk, albeit disproportionately. Interestingly, this report by the European Environment Agency observes that between 1980 and 2021, weather extremes inflicted economic losses estimated at EUR 560 billion in the EU Member States. 
It is clear that climate change is an existential and generational threat that should unify the otherwise divided world along the socio-economic and political lines, should it hope to avert the incurring human and economic costs. However, are we already too late? The IPCC AR6 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2023 warns that considering the current state of climate policies, global warming is projected to rise by 3.2°C by 2100, belying the aspirations of the Paris Agreement. Also, findings report that climate change’s risks and adverse impacts will only escalate with global warming. The worrying variable underscoring scientific predictions lies in understanding climate ‘tipping points’ beyond which natural positive feedback loops get induced exponentially, accelerating warming trends even without additional greenhouse gasses through melting permafrost releasing trapped methane with 80 times the heating power of carbon dioxide. Such positive feedback mechanisms imply reaching net zero human carbon emissions may also be inadequate to reverse global warming. This apprehension is enough to emphasize why restoration of a safe climate while we still can remains humanity’s most pressing challenge in the immediate decades ahead. 
As a reminder that time is fleeting, besides being the hottest year on record, 2023 also bears the distinction of being exceptionally devastating regarding climate disasters. Reliefweb reports that this year, floods, wildfires, cyclones, storms, and landslides claimed 30% more lives globally than in 2022, and a conservative WHO estimate predicts 250,000 additional deaths worldwide per annum by 2030s due to climate change implications like malaria and coastal flooding. However, the downstream impacts can be much higher, considering that nearly half of the world’s population is engaged in agrarian activities directly dependent on predictable seasons and temperatures. Even incremental changes can wash off livelihoods and destabilize food production systems, threatening the nutritional security of billions around the globe. 
Although climate change is often downplayed as a hoax at its best and a conspiracy theory at its worst, the steadily increasing instances of ecological anomalies, biodiversity losses, extreme temperatures, and precipitation deviations co-occurring across continents provide tangible proof otherwise. Today, the compounded cost of climate inaction is unaffordably higher than that of climate action. Yet COP28’s failure to uphold the aspirations of the Paris Agreement equitably is the latest reminder of our continued fixation with the former. Here, the question arises whether history will judge us kindly for this choice and how steep a reparation the posterity will have to pay for our sins. 
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/blogs/in-the-name-of-development/the-climate-change-continuum/






China daily 1 
Hole in protective layer on road to recovery in decades
A hole found in the ozone layer, which protects lives on the Earth by shielding it from the sun's most harmful rays, is on track to recover in the next four decades, according to a United Nations-backed panel of experts.
The panel also found that the treaty that made that possible has played a big role in mitigating climate change.
A colorless active gas, ozone reacts readily with a great many other substances. It is listed as one of the major air pollutants near the ground, as even relatively low amounts of the gas can cause lung damage and result in shortness of breath.
However, the ozone layer, about 20 kilometers above the ground, helps shield the Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation known as ultraviolet B.
After the discovery of the ozone hole in the 1980s, the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer was adopted in 1987 to regulate the production and consumption of nearly 100 human-made chemicals that deplete the ozone layer. It has since been ratified by 198 parties.
The latest quadrennial assessment report by a UN-backed scientific assessment panel said the accord has succeeded in safeguarding the ozone layer.
If current policies remain in place, the ozone layer is expected to recover to 1980 values by around 2066 over the Antarctic, by 2045 over the Arctic and by 2040 for the rest of the world, according to a report by the panel published in late 2022.
Variations in the size of the Antarctic ozone hole, particularly between 2019 and 2021, were driven mainly by meteorological factors, it said. Nevertheless, the area and depth of the Antarctic ozone hole have been slowly decreasing since 2000.
The report also reaffirmed that the treaty has played a positive role in climate change mitigation.
It said new studies supported previous assessments that the decline in emissions of ozone-depleting substances due to compliance with the Montreal Protocol would reduce global warming by approximately 0.5 to 1 C by midcentury compared to an extreme scenario in which ODS emissions increased by 3 to 3.5 percent a year.
A 2016 amendment to the Montreal Protocol, known as the Kigali Amendment, is also expected to contribute to the global endeavor to cope with global warming, the report said.
The amendment calls for a gradual reduction in the consumption and production of hydrofluorocarbons, which are used to replace ODS in foam-blowing agents and refrigerants but are powerful heat-trapping gases.
Compliance with the Kigali Amendment will help reduce global warming by 0.3 to 0.5 C by the end of this century, the report said.




chinadaily.com.cn/a/202402/22/WS65d6b098a31082fc043b87d9.html


China daily 2


mproved outlook on ozone layer gives hope
By Belinda Robinson in New York | China Daily | Updated: 2023-01-11 00:00
An influential panel of UN-backed scientists said airborne chemicals that have been destroying the ozone layer are now in decline for the first time, which could help repair the crucial layer that protects humans from the sun's most harmful rays.
The report, released by the United Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organization on Monday, showed that there has been a thickening of the ozone layer — a part of the atmosphere up to 29 kilometers high that absorbs harmful ultraviolet rays and blocks them from the Earth's surface.
Scientists believe that by 2040, the ozone layer worldwide could be on track to switch back to levels not seen since the 1980s, and by 2066 over Antarctica, where it had declined so much it had left a hole above the South Pole.
For decades, climate change activists have warned that the ozone layer was being depleted due to the increased use of harmful chemicals.
The chemicals damaged a crucial part of the atmosphere that protects humans from excess ultraviolet rays that can cause skin cancer and eye damage in humans. Ozone also protects plants from damage, enabling them to grow and store carbon dioxide in their leaves.
In the past few decades, several steps have been taken to aid in the restoration of the ozone layer. One of them is the Montreal Protocol, which came into force in 1989, and was approved by every country worldwide.
It outlaws the manufacturing of chemicals that destroy the ozone when they mingle in the atmosphere.
The chemicals include chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which have ozone-depleting chlorine and were generally used in refrigerators, aerosols and air conditioners.
Contribution hailed
Scientists said in the report that China had largely eliminated emissions of one of those chemicals.
Less use of the 99-percent banned ozone-depleting substances has helped heal the ozone layer, the report said.
The report's findings were presented at the American Meteorological Society's 103rd annual meeting in Denver.
The research used data from the WMO, UNEP, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NASA and the European Commission.
WMO Secretary-General Petteri Taalas said in a statement: "Our success in phasing out ozone-eating chemicals shows us what can and must be done — as a matter of urgency — to transition away from fossil fuels, reduce greenhouse gases and so limit temperature increase."
Thanu Yakupitiyage, communications director of 350 Action, wants to see the US government do even more to combat climate change.
"Achieving social and economic transformation means we need to see elected officials at all levels, committed to doing everything it takes to protect people and the planet, and it has to be a high priority for all elected officials," Yakupitiyage told China Daily.


https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202301/11/WS63be22dea31057c47eba8f31.html


China daily 3
Progress hailed in tackling non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions
The file photo shows a wind power plant in Zhangjiakou, North China's Hebei province. [Photo/Xinhua]
China has made remarkable progress in reducing HFCs — a type of greenhouse gas that is more potent than carbon dioxide, according to Zhao Yingmin, vice-minister of ecology and environment.
Speaking at an event last month themed on preserving the ozone layer, Zhao said this progress has been achieved as the nation strives to implement the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.
The Kigali Amendment was created in 2016 to gradually reduce the consumption and production of HFCs based on the consensus that they are powerful greenhouse gases.
Given their zero impact on depletion of the ozone layer, HFCs, formally known as hydrofluorocarbons, are used as replacements for some substances that have such an effect. Ozone depleting substances and HFCs are most commonly used in refrigeration and air-conditioning applications.
Zhao said that with the Kigali Amendment taking effect in China on Sept 15 last year, the nation has entered a new chapter in synergizing ozone layer protection and tackling climate change.
He said the ministry and four other central government bodies, including the National Development and Reform Commission, have included HFCs in China's list of restricted ozone depleting substances and controlled substances for import and export.
China also brought HFCs under its import and export license system ahead of schedule on Nov 11, he said. To date, the nation has completed examination and approval processes for 20,000 import and export businesses related to these substances.
Since Sept 15 last year, Zhao said China has also banned companies from directly discharging HFC-23 — a powerful climate pollutant — as byproducts.
This year, the nation capped the output of five major HFCs and banned companies from increasing HFC production capacity, Zhao added.
China will also work to reduce emissions of methane — a greenhouse gas more powerful than carbon dioxide in trapping heat.
Methane is one of the major concerns in the action plan to reduce carbon emissions and enhance carbon sequestration capacity in the agricultural sector. Carbon sequestration is the process of capturing, securing and storing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The plan was jointly issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and the National Development and Reform Commission in July.
Ruminant livestock species produce methane as a byproduct of digestion. Methane emissions also occur in rice planting and fish farming. The action plan pledges to tackle all three major emission sources.
It vows to reduce emissions from ruminants by upgrading feeding methods, promoting breed improvement, and strengthening yield per unit. Measures will also be taken to use more feces from ruminants as resources to reduce the methane they emit.






chinadaily.com.cn/a/202210/13/WS63474ad8a310fd2b29e7c1dd.html


China daily 4
The future of island states and poor countries in the face of climate change
By M.M. Palitha Mahinda Munasinghe | chinadaily.com.cn | Updated: 2021-11-18 14:24
Delegates from 195 countries signed the most important Memorandum of Understanding in world history on December 12, 2015 in Paris. Scientists have warned that if global warming continues to be uncontrollable, its catastrophic effects will be irreversible. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned said that by 2030, the Earth's temperature is expected to exceed 1.5 degrees.
According to a report released at the recent COP 26 conference in Glasgow, 65 countries in the world are at high risk for climate change. However, the consequences of this situation are expected to affect the rest of the world. In addition, they predict that by 2050, GDP will fall by an average of 20 percent in high-risk countries, and that poverty in those countries will inevitably rise. Small island nations of the world will not be able to avoid the sudden surge of storms if global warming continues. Millions of people could be displaced without access to drinking water and food, and infrastructure could be destroyed, according to the World Health Organization.
Meanwhile, the deforestation in Africa and some parts of South America and Asia and the illegal use of fossil fuels are also problematic. Coal-fired power plants around the world are responsible for 46 percent of carbon dioxide emissions and 72 percent of total greenhouse gas emissions. Pollution from coal-fired power plants is linked to public health impacts such as heart and lung disease, neurological disorders, asthma and cancer. In addition, such projects can result in global warming with the emission of mercury, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide and arsenic, and acid pollution, and pose a serious problem. It is a fateful phenomenon that global climate change, a catastrophe created by rich countries against nature, is now affecting island states and poor countries more powerfully.
In addition, in the wake of the impending catastrophe, those countries that had previously ignored climate change to protect their economic and political power are now appalled by the consequences. However, many developed countries are still emitting greenhouse gases in quantitative quantities and are still ignoring climate change for economic reasons. Moreover, as developing countries such as India, Indonesia and Vietnam face expanding economic challenges, this historic shift in responsibility is echoed in the current climate debate. Poverty and human security challenges are another aspect, along with extreme weather events such as droughts, floods and mudslides in Africa and Asia. It is also unfortunate that the support of rich and powerful countries for the world's island nations as well as poor countries remains at a low level. However, we must not forget that it is against this backdrop that they are working to find solutions to global climate change.
Increasing carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and other greenhouse gas emissions are the driving force behind climate change. Accordingly, the answer that can be assumed based on the data collected as to who is responsible for most greenhouse gas emissions may not be so clear. However, looking at the total volume of greenhouse gases a country emits annually, researchers have identified the countries that emit the most greenhouse gases each year. China, the United States, India, the European Union, Russia, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan, Iran and South Korea top the list.
Whatever the arguments, the effects of climate change are growing in many ways and will affect almost every living thing on earth. Extreme temperatures are forecast to cause glaciers to melt, sea levels to rise, droughts to intensify, and more intense rain and dust storms. There is still no clear positive answer to this global challenge. Climate change is an extraordinary threat to our planet. Otherwise, it will be more difficult for the humans and animals to endure these extreme conditions.
The greenhouse effect is a natural process that keeps the Earth's atmosphere at the temperature necessary to actually sustain life. Gases such as carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, which act like glass walls in a greenhouse, retain the sun's heat in the atmosphere and prevent it from escaping. Clouds and the atmosphere reflect about a third of the sun's radiation back to Earth, absorbing about 20 percent of it. About 50 percent of the remaining radiation reaches the Earth, where it is absorbed by the oceans and land. The Earth also releases heat back into space. Some of this heat travels through the atmosphere. However, most of it is absorbed and retained by greenhouse gases before leaving. This mechanism helps to keep the earth warm. That condition has helped to sustain the flora, fauna and human life on Earth.
In general, the greenhouse effect warms the earth enough to sustain life. Meteorologists and physicists predict that without the greenhouse effect, the Earth's average temperature would drop from 14 C to minus 18 C. The greenhouse effect has aided life on Earth for millions of years. Today, however, human activities, such as deforestation and the use of fossil fuels, are releasing more and more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. It absorbs most of the sun's radiation and contributes to global warming. As climate change worsens, governments, international organizations, NGOs, and scientists have come forward to highlight the consequences. Accordingly, reducing or preventing greenhouse gas emissions and responding to the effects of climate change are being adopted as courses of action.
There have been international efforts to assist developing countries adapt to climate change. Governments and community groups lead efforts in their countries. Efforts have been made to resettle communities away from flood-prone areas and to help them secure food and water supply in drought-affected areas. Many experts agree that governments, not individuals or private enterprises, should lead the fight against climate change. It is unfortunate, however, that they do not agree on the most effective options for solving the problem.
Scientists are focusing on the Industrial Revolution, marking the beginning of a period in which human activity began to release large amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Since then, global temperatures have risen by more than 1 C, with scientists predicting that this could rise to between 2 C and 6 C in the next century. Global warming has caused fluctuations throughout Earth's history. However, NASA reveals that the rate of change we are experiencing today is unprecedented, a cause of serious anxiety.
In particular, the Kyoto Protocol, another important climate agreement prior to the Paris Agreement, required that each country reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to specific standards. Its responsibility for rectification rests with the developed countries, which emit the most gases. Accordingly, the EU initially wanted to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 8 percent and did not demand any reductions from underdeveloped countries. However, under the Paris Agreement, all countries have agreed to share responsibilities collectively. Accordingly, all countries in the world will voluntarily work out national strategies to achieve this based on their economic capabilities. This means that every country that agrees to the agreement will work unconditionally to reduce its emissions through its own national plan. Accordingly, the plans of each country may differ significantly from one another and results may vary depending on a country's specific goals, aspiration levels, and even how they measure emissions cuts.
However, transformation is needed to reduce the informal and unrestricted industrial emissions in the areas of transportation, production, construction and land use. The goal is to bring it down to zero in practice by 2050. The industrial emissions reduction alone will not be enough. However, we must meet it to prevent a global catastrophe. This ambitious goal requires greater investment in the protection, restoration and improvement of forests and wetlands that naturally remove carbon from the atmosphere for an energy transition.
Today, an incredible solution to the problem of climate change is the photosynthesis process. It greatly helps to regulate the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Apart from that, it has contributed to human well-being by naturally purifying water and air, conserving biodiversity and building healthy soil. That is why we need to protect our natural resources. However, as domestic energy demand continues to rise in line with economic growth, our country also needs to move quickly to work toward developing the economy through lower carbon emissions and renewable energy use.
To this end, a wide range of opportunities can be created for nature conservation projects by incorporating renewable energy from solar, wind and ocean waves into the main power grid. In addition, the use of more electrified vehicles and machinery is now being seriously considered. Carbon pollution can also be significantly reduced by systematically developing forests throughout the country and encouraging investment in renewable energy solutions associated with farmland and grasslands. We can also contribute to adaptation to climate change by cultivating plants such as mangroves in high-risk wetlands.
At the same time, the effects of ocean storms and coastal erosion in the face of climate change will severely jeopardize the lives and livelihoods of the vast coastal fishing communities. Living coral reefs, especially those close to the coast, can reduce coastal waves by 97 percent on average and protect more than 200 million people globally. It has been identified that 95 percent of all commercially important fish species depend on coastal habitats at some stage in their life cycles. They store carbon in their environment for thousands of years. It filters and purifies coastal waters, reducing pollution from agricultural and industrial effluents.
Therefore, the establishment of new coral reefs and the creation of an ecosystem for it can lay a healthy environment for coastal communities as well as a good foundation for a tourism economy. The widespread use of land for housing, buildings and highways is also a major driver of climate change. That is why the land use sector is responsible for soil degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. We must immediately implement new solutions based on land development, an issue that is currently receiving little attention. Nature and technology together provide us with many of the tools needed to mitigate climate change. However, the question is whether we have the political will to use them quickly.
We know we need to accelerate the transition to renewable energy. We have come a long way in to understand the realities on the ground. We still have time to mitigate the effects of climate change. However, they should be done with hard work and courage.


https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202111/18/WS6195f1b3a310cdd39bc7618b.html


Global times 1


GT investigates: How developed nations shift blame on climate change
Politicizing issue hurts global cooperation: expert
By Shan Jie, Huang Lanlan and Zhao Yusha


Though they have the world's highest per-capita greenhouse gas emissions and transfer polluting companies to less developed regions, in terms of confronting climate change, developed countries continue to shift the blame to developing countries, and have failed to fulfill their obligations. The familiar scene could have resurfaced and caused tensions at the 26th United Nations Conference of Parties on Climate Change (COP26) in Glasgow, Scotland.


Xie Zhenhua, China Special Envoy for Climate Change, noted on Tuesday in Glasgow that "rich nations made a significant pledge to channel $100 billion a year to less wealthy nations by 2020 twelve years ago, and this hasn't been fulfilled."


He underlined the significance of putting the Paris agreement into practice, saying it is important to translate the political will of countries into action, CGTN reported.




Why COP26 matters - Global disasters caused by climate change. Graphic: GT




As the COP26 summit continued, Western media reported that Chinese and Russian leaders were absent from the meeting, which they said "raised questions" on the countries' commitment to lower emissions.


Chinese President Xi Jinping participated in the summit through a written statement on Monday, reaffirming China's goals and measures, and called on stronger global actions on climate change. Last year, the country announced its goals to achieve a carbon peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060.


Instead of reflecting on what they have done to the global climate, some Western politicians and activists have been pressuring developing countries.


US President Joe Biden expressed his disappointment by claiming China and Russia "basically didn't show up" on the issue during the G20 summit in Rome. 


"Why should the UK be making changes when China is still polluting?" climate activist Greta Thunberg told BBC on Sunday.


Observers noted that Western politicians are always busy peddling this narrative in an attempt to shift the responsibility of climate change, turning a blind eye to the fact that developed countries, even today, are the main culprits of CO2 emissions.


Developed countries have been "polluting, managing, then transferring [the pollution to other regions]." But developing countries such as China and India, will not follow them in damaging the environment of the planet, a Chinese top environmental researcher told the Global Times.


"The practice of politicizing the climate issue is not conducive to global climate cooperation," he said.


Too many to record






Accusing China and other developing countries in terms of greenhouse gas emissions is a common trick for some Westerners, who, after enjoying the benefits at the cost of polluting the environment for decades, now start to blame other countries for "emitting too much greenhouse gases."


World Bank data released by the World Bank in March show the per-capita carbon emissions of China was 6.4 metric tons per citizen, 15th in the world, much fewer than major developed countries including the US (17.6), Canada (15.7), Australia (14.9) and South Korea (13.3). In 2018, the average CO2 emissions of high-income countries and regions was 10.3 metric tons per capita, while for China was 7.4.


A previous study of two Stanford University scientists found that the US, Japan and many Western European nations managed to "'outsource' more than half of their CO2 emissions and evade responsibility for their share of the climate-altering pollution," by exporting their production needs to developing countries.


Looking back at the last half century, developed countries led by the US contributed the overwhelming majority of emissions in their industrialization. World Bank statistics show that the US' CO2 emissions stayed more than 18 metric tons per capita between 1966 and 2008, with a high of 22.5 in 1973. 


Aside from domestic emissions, the US-led Western world started setting up factories in developing countries, including China and India, under pressure from environmentalists. Pollution-intensive companies accounted for 29.12 percent of all companies built in China by foreign investors in 1991, and 39 percent of foreign-invested companies in China were "highly polluting," Chinese media reported. 


The US outsourced about 11 percent of total consumption-based emissions, primarily to the developing world, according to the study, "Consumption-Based Accounting of CO2 Emissions," published in 2010. 


Of the CO2 emissions linked to goods and services consumed in many European countries, more than a third "actually occurred elsewhere," the report said.


On the other hand, as the "world's factory," 29 percent of China's emissions were attributed to products shipped to developed countries, an article released on the Chinese carbon emissions website tanpaifang.com in 2014 said.


For decades, the US' overseas factories have polluted developing nations, some of which even led to deadly incidents. On December 3, 1984, residents in Bhopal, India were poisoned by 40 tons of toxic gas from a factory owned by Union Carbide. The poison gas leak killed 15,000 more in the succeeding weeks, and "hundreds of thousands still suffer from the effects of exposure and contamination of land and water," the Guardian reported in an article in memory of the disaster's 25th anniversary.


Developed countries first enjoyed rapid development, and then transferred pollution after the ecosystem was destroyed and the environment was polluted, while developing countries only take over polluting industries to defeat poverty, Li Haisheng, president of the Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, told the Global Times.


But the world has a shared future for life on earth. He quoted Friedrich Engels as saying, "Let us not, however, flatter ourselves much on account of our human victories over nature. For each such victory nature takes its revenge on us."


Broken promise






During the United Nations climate summit in 2009 in Copenhagen, developed countries promised to channel $100 billion a year to developing countries by 2020 to help them confront climate change, but the promise was not fulfilled, making it another example of how developing countries failing to act.


Funding has become a focus in Glasgow, which, according to a Nature report in late October, has increased tensions between different parties before COP26.


The report quoted Saleemul Huq, director of the International Center for Climate Change and Development, as saying that "By the time we get to Glasgow, if they haven't given us another $100 billion [for 2021], then they are completely unable to meet their obligations."


Developed countries claimed that they contributed $80 billion in climate finance to developing countries in 2019, and $78 billion in 2018.


Developed and developing countries also differ on what finance means.


"To developing countries, the financing are public funds used for aid, but for the developed countries, they talk about the money to 'mobilize,'" Wang Mou from the research center of urban and environment studies of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, who is also a member of the Chinese delegation to COP26, said during a recent online conference.


Even the funds developed countries claim to have given are inflated. For instance, they even count the travel fees of some experts. The Nature report also pointed out that road construction projects were counted as climate aid.


"Funding is not a donation or aid, but an obligation of developed countries," noted an officer from the Chinese delegation on Monday.  
https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202111/1237976.shtml


Global times 2


Concepts, practices inspired by Xi’s thought on ecological civilization shine at COP29, offer solutions to global fight against climate change
By Shan Jie
Published: Nov 24, 2024 09:12
Editor's Note:
Xi Jinping, general secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee, Chinese president, and chairman of the Central Military Commission, stressed that the environment concerns the well-being of people in all countries. During his inspections, Xi has always paid great attention to ecosystems, spanning from cities to rural areas, and from enterprises to communities.


Over the last decade, under the guidance of Chinese President Xi Jinping's Thought on Ecological Civilization, China has been advancing the green transition of its economy. Regions across the country are actively promoting the construction of ecological civilization and advancing Chinese modernization featuring harmony between humanity and nature. These efforts are creating a "Beautiful China."


The coming five years will be critical to the building of a "Beautiful China." The Global Times is launching a series of stories to explore the progress of ecological civilization projects that Xi is concerned with, delving into the positive environmental changes occurring now, and offering valuable insights and references for both national and global efforts. From these practical examples, we can see how Xi's thought on ecological civilization is put into practice and further inspires public action.


In this installment, we delve into how China's practices and concepts, inspired by Xi Jinping's Thought on Ecological Civilization, were shared and highlighted at the just concluded COP29, in Baku, Azerbaijan.




Photo: VCG


The 29th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP29) in Baku, Azerbaijan, concluded on Sunday morning, local time, with a breakthrough agreement to triple annual public climate finance for developing countries, raising it from $100 billion to $300 billion by 2035.


The New Collective Quantified Goal on Climate Finance (NCQG) also targets mobilizing $1.3 trillion annually from public and private sources by 2035. Reached after two weeks of negotiations, the agreement emphasizes global collaboration to tackle climate challenges and support clean energy growth.


"This was a complex negotiation in an uncertain and divided geopolitical landscape. I commend everyone who worked hard to build consensus. You have shown that multilateralism - centered on the Paris Agreement - can find a path through the most difficult issues," UN Secretary-General António Guterres stated in the COP29 closing statement.


As a developing country, in the realm of climate change, China has consistently taken proactive measures, established goals, enacted laws and regulations, and implemented them in practice. 


Back in September 2020, addressing the general debate of the 75th session of the UN General Assembly, President Xi announced that China aims to have CO2 emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060.


Chinese Vice Premier Ding Xuexiang noted at the World Leaders Climate Action Summit during the COP29 in Baku that since 2016, China has provided and mobilized more than 177 billion yuan ($24.5 billion) of project funds in support of other developing countries' climate response.


In a previous media interview, China's special envoy for climate change, Liu Zhenmin, emphasized that China would continue to provide assistance to developing countries through South-South cooperation channels.


To capture China's voice and stories at COP29, the Global Times spoke with experts, young representatives, and Chinese enterprises attending the event. They shared vivid examples of China's carbon reduction efforts, demonstrating how the country leads in global climate governance and provides practical solutions for achieving the "dual carbon" goals.


Delivering stories


How does the Palace Museum in central Beijing achieve zero waste? How are snow leopards in the Himalayas being protected amid the challenges of climate change?


During COP29, these compelling stories showcased the tangible efforts of the Chinese public in combating climate change. 


Some of the initiatives were presented at the side event "Public Participation Supporting the Construction of a Beautiful China," held at the China Pavilion and organized by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment with other institutions.


Representatives from the Palace Museum, for example, explained that by optimizing waste sorting, composting garden waste, and implementing measures like "zero-waste offices" and "zero-waste tourism," they significantly reduced waste generation. Additionally, various events have engaged tens of millions of domestic and international visitors in sustainability efforts. 




A side event is held at the China Pavilion during the COP29. Photo: Courtesy of UN Climate Change
In 2020, the Palace Museum and the Vanke Foundation jointly launched the "Zero Waste Palace Museum" project, making the ancient palace a symbol of innovative sustainability, the Global Times learned from the Vanke Foundation.


At COP29, the Vanke Foundation presented immersive multimedia exhibits showcasing achievements in snow leopard habitat conservation and carbon-neutral community development, emphasizing China's dedication to addressing climate challenges.


Another fascinating detail was the use of eco-friendly paper furniture, trash bins, and rice husk cups at the China Pavilion. Even after enduring 50 events over two weeks, the much-talked-about paper chairs remained sturdy, showcasing the green ambitions of China's manufacturing industry.


These vivid stories also bring to life the achievements of China's low-carbon development in recent years. 


The share of non-fossil energy in total energy consumption reached 17.9 percent, while forest stock volume increased to 19.493 billion cubic meters, a rise of 6.5 billion cubic meters from 2005, already achieving the 2030 target, Pei Xiaofei, spokesperson for the Ministry of Ecology and Environment, stated at a press conference in November.


As of the end of July 2024, the total installed capacity of wind and solar power was 1.206 billion kilowatts, 2.25 times that of the end of 2020. 


This progress has made a significant contribution to addressing climate change, Pei introduced.


Boosting cooperation


China has also been actively advancing global efforts to address climate change and ecological preservation, fostering international cooperation, particularly through the Belt and Road Initiative.


At Session I of the 19th G20 Summit on Fight Against Hunger and Poverty in Rio de Janeiro on November 18, President Xi outlined China's eight actions for global development in his remarks.


Among the eight, the first is to pursue high-quality Belt and Road cooperation. On top of 700 billion yuan ($96.7 billion) added financing windows and an additional 80 billion yuan ($11.1 billion) injection into the Silk Road Fund, China is moving ahead with the development of the multidimensional Belt and Road connectivity network, one that is led by the building of a green Silk Road and will empower a digital Silk Road, the Xinhua News Agency reported.


During COP29, Chinese new energy vehicles (NEVs), as a flagship example of China's green development and technology sharing, became a striking feature near the event's venue.


NIO electric cars with COP29 logos were frequently spotted at the COP29 venue. The Global Times learned from the company that a fleet of 140 NIO vehicles served as official reception and business vehicles for COP29, with COP29 President Mukhtar Babayev also traveling to the venue in a NIO vehicle.




A NIO EV is spotted at the COP29 venue during the event on November 15, 2024 in Baku, Azerbaijan. Photo: Courtesy of NIO
It was not the only Chinese electric vehicle (EV) brand featured in Baku. Many shuttle buses operating between COP29 sites were provided by China's BYD. 


During COP29, NIO and its partner signed a strategic cooperation agreement, announcing the provision of intelligent EVs and services to local users in Azerbaijan, the Global Times learned from NIO.


"Azerbaijan is advancing its green transition and sustainable development. The new energy vehicle industry holds significant potential, and NIO is eager to deeply participate in this process, contributing to the promotion of EVs locally while accelerating the company's globalization journey," Qin Lihong, co-founder and president of NIO, told the Global Times.


In addition to NEVs, China's photovoltaic industry also are active in climate governance.


During COP29, Chinese solar supplier LONGi and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) jointly launched the "Photovoltaic Promotion for Climate Action and Biodiversity Conservation Initiative."  


Previously, LONGi donated a distributed photovoltaic power station to the Qinling Giant Panda Research Center in Northwest China's Shaanxi Province, and provided photovoltaic products and off-grid technology to support field monitoring equipment.


Beate Trankmann, UNDP Resident Representative in China, told the Global Times that given China's position as a global pioneer in emerging technologies and cutting-edge innovations, its knowledge and experience will continue to be vital to informing discussions on global governance and the regulation of frontier technologies, and how they can be harnessed for positive development impact.


Future changemakers


The participation of Chinese youth has become a cornerstone of the country's future efforts in tackling climate change, as China's climate actions are not merely short-term proposals, but long-term strategies involving future generations.


At the Leaders Summit on Climate on April 22, 2021, Xi said that "climate change poses pressing, formidable and long-term challenges to us all. Yet I am confident that as long as we unite in our purposes and efforts and work together with solidarity and mutual assistance, we will rise above the global climate and environment challenges and leave a clean and beautiful world to future generations."


At COP29, young representatives from China donned traditional ethnic garb, launching a cultural exchange initiative as part of a goodwill visit. Carrying souvenirs rich in Chinese cultural elements, they visited over 20 pavilions from different regions and international organizations, including Brazil, Malaysia, Africa, the UAE, and oceanic countries, culminating in a stop at the host country Azerbaijan's pavilion.


One standout participant was Xie Zongxu, a Gen Z youth from Miao ethnic group in Southwest China's Guizhou Province, who appeared in the iconic "Hundred Birds Outfit." Xie showcased exquisite Miao embroidery featuring symbolic natural patterns, including a handcrafted piece specially created for COP29.




Young representatives from different countries wearing traditional outfits pose for a photo during the COP29 in Baku, Azerbaijan. Photo: Courtesy of GAUC
The Chinese youth delegation at COP29 included over 20 representatives who joined cultural exchange activities and presentations. These individuals were part of the Global Alliance of Universities on Climate (GAUC), initiated by Tsinghua University, which selected 28 young leaders from 10 countries to form the COP29 Youth Delegation. At the GAUC Pavilion, delegates from member universities, global youth, and stakeholders from various regions and countries engaged in diverse exchanges.


As part of their mission, the youth representatives conveyed China's achievements in renewable energy promotion, low-carbon development, and encouraged more young people to participation in climate action.


In 2020, Xi sent a reply letter to GAUC student representatives, commending their shared concern for issues affecting the future of humanity. He expressed hope that the students would actively contribute to protecting the shared home of all humankind, our planet.


"This is my first time attending COP," Liu Xingyan, a youth representative from GAUC, told the Global Times. "I see it as a unique opportunity not only to document diverse climate actions, but also to share China's story of climate resilience and innovation with the world. It's about bridging perspectives and building a community of changemakers," she said.


https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202411/1323689.shtml


Global times 3
Climate change offers new realm for China-India cooperation


India is suffering rising loss and damage owing to climate change. The large investments required to fight extreme weather ought to be supported by the world's wealthy nations through a loss and damage financing facility, the India delegation told representatives of rich countries at the climate change conference in Bonn, Germany, where officials are meeting to prepare for the next UN climate conference in November in Egypt, the Guardian reported on Tuesday.


Large parts of India have been stifled by an unprecedented heat wave over the past two months. Climate change has made record-breaking heat waves in northwest India and Pakistan 100 times more likely, the BBC reported in May. Increasingly, global warming prompts New Delhi to become an active participant at global climate talks.


The US retains the first position in the world for cumulative emissions of greenhouse gases. Taking a U-turn from the attitude of former US President Donald Trump, who made the decision to withdraw the US from the Paris Climate Agreement, US President Joe Biden has set an ambitious goal of reducing greenhouse gases by 50-52 percent by 2030. 


This set target is commendable, but it does not necessarily mean the US will be willing to pay for climate disasters caused by its cumulative carbon dioxide emissions and provide financial assistance to developing countries like India to help them tackle climate change. 


Instead, the US may try to reestablish itself as a global loudspeaker on climate change while criticizing fast-growing emerging market economies like India, which record increased carbon emissions due to industrialization, though those countries have also vowed to take effective measures to tackle climate change.


New Delhi has pledged to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2070, and China aims to have carbon dioxide emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. Developing economies still face a major task of raising people's living standards through vigorous development, which may make it harder for them to cut carbon emissions compared with the wealthy nations. 


However, the efforts of the developing countries to grow their economies failed to win applause but questioning and critique from the West. Western politicians have been keen on hyping up China and India's role as the world's major greenhouse gas emitters, and deliberately overlooked their attempts to reduce carbon emissions.


China and India jointly asked the developed countries to provide financing to emerging market economies to help reduce their own carbon emissions in 2015, but their call has fallen on deaf ears, according to media reports. 


In this regard, the emerging market economies have more common interests than their divergences in tackling climate changes and building a clean economy. Striking a balance between ambitious emissions reduction targets and industrialization, the emerging market economies must pursue development paths different from those adopted by the West. The green economy is the only way out.


Building a clean economy will lead to more advanced scientific and technological developments, facilitating the growth of strategic emerging industries. Developing countries, including China and India, have common ground upon which they can expand economic cooperation.


According to a statement jointly released by 17 Chinese departments including the Ministry of Ecology and Environment, China aims to "basically" build a "climate-resilient society" by 2035. The country's climate change monitoring and early warning capability will reach an advanced level by 2035, while the climate risk management and prevention system will basically mature then, the Xinhua News Agency reported Tuesday. The development of a "climate-resilient society" means a huge market and abundant business opportunities.


The emerging markets are thriving. However, if each of the developing nations stands on its own feet, their influence will remain weak on the international stage. Emerging market economies need to collaborate to build a climate-resilient economy and share market opportunities via framework such as BRICS and BRICS Plus. It will bring more benefits than funds which the wealthy countries are reluctant to pay. 


The author is a reporter with the Global Times. bizopinion@globaltimes.com.cn
https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202206/1268221.shtml


Global times 4


A simple, moderate, and green lifestyle, universal involvement keys to tackling climate change
Unfolding crisis
By Xie Wenting and Huang Xian in Guiyang
Published: Jul 12, 2023 10:33 PM Updated: Jul 12, 2023 10:59 PM


As the scorching heat of the summer continues to grip the world's northern hemisphere, relentless heatwaves have become an unwelcome norm, signaling a harsh wakeup call ­­- the effects of climate change are no longer a distant future, but a blistering reality.


With record-breaking temperatures not seen in 100,000 years in conjunction with extreme weather events, and their far-reaching effects, the world finds itself at a critical juncture, where urgent action is imperative to confront the unfolding climate crisis.


At the just-concluded Eco Forum Global Guiyang 2023 hosted in Guiyang, Southwest China's Guizhou Province, chief scientist at the National Climate Center Sun Ying pointed out that research conducted has confirmed that extreme weather events in the future will become more frequent and last longer. In the future, high temperatures will become the new norm.


"Currently, there is a consensus among the international and the scientific communities that human activities are the primary driving force behind global warming," she said.


To tackle climate change, China has actively shouldered its responsibility in seeking green and low-carbon development and the preservation of ecology. It has also cooperated with other countries in promoting green development including highly prioritizing investment in green energy. 


"The Law on Foreign Relations of the People's Republic of China" was recently passed, Article 25 of which states that China "plays an active part in global environmental and climate governance and endeavors to strengthen international cooperation in green and low-carbon development; it is committed to jointly enhancing global ecological conservation and building a global system of environmental and climate governance that is fair, equitable, cooperative, and beneficial to all."


"China has become a model for the world in climate change governance," noted Colombian Ambassador to China Sergio Cabrera Cárdenas.






A lonely polar bear swims among melting glaciers. Photo: VCG




Harsh reality


China's warming rate is higher than the global average, and the frequency of extreme heat events is significantly increasing, the Blue Book on Climate Change in China (2023) noted, which was issued on Saturday during the Eco Forum Global Guiyang 2023. 


A total of 3,501 extreme heat events were recorded in 2022, the most frequent since 1961. Among them, 366 events in Southwest China's Chongqing Municipality, Central China's Hubei Province, and other regions saw temperatures surpassing historical records.


Other parts of the world are also grappling with unusual high temperatures. The US National Weather Service said that at one point, more than 120 million Americans - meaning more than one in three of its total population - were under some kind of heat advisory, read a BBC report.


In the UK, the temperature was 0.9 C higher than the previous high record in June set back in 1940, read the report. Other regions including the Middle East and North Africa also experienced unprecedented heatwaves. 


"We can understand the general trend. In the future, it is certain that high temperatures will become the new normal. However, the specific extent and locations to which this normalization will occur are matters that need to be explored in the future," Sun said, noting that it is hard to accurately predict the length and the exact locations of such extreme weather phenomena at present.


According to Sun, in China, high temperatures are mainly recorded in eastern China. In the western regions like the Qinghai-Xizang (Tibet) Plateau and Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau, where the terrain is relatively elevated, temperatures are indeed warming but not to the same extent as in the east.


"Both the 2022 and this year's high temperatures are considered highly abnormal. Based on our analysis of extensive data, high temperatures in 2022, particularly in the Yangtze River basin, broke record levels. Similarly, this year's temperatures have also surpassed previous records in North China," she said. 


The impacts of these extreme temperatures go beyond mere heat. High temperatures in 2022 triggered numerous events, such as severe drought in the Yangtze River basin, which was aggravated by the lack of rainfall following the heatwave. There is a feedback mechanism in meteorology where high temperatures and drought exacerbate each other, leading to a compounding effect on the intensity of the heat, the expert noted. 


Sun explains that natural factors such as solar radiation, volcanic eruptions, and internal variations within the climate system, as well as human factors like greenhouse gas emissions and deforestation, are the two primary causes of climate warming.


However, human activities are now the most significant cause of global warming, with their impact estimated to be approximately ten times that of natural factors, she noted.


The latest assessment report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) revealed that human factors have been the dominant contributor to climate warming over the last century. From pre-industrial times to the present day, a quantitative conclusion is that the global average temperature has increased by approximately 1.1 degrees. Human factors have contributed around 1.07 C, while natural factors may account for approximately 0.1 C.


"This indicates that human factors are the primary influencing factor based on the magnitude of their contribution," Sun said.


Meanwhile, El Nino, a climate pattern characterized by warmer than average ocean temperatures in the equatorial Pacific which can lead to significant weather disruptions worldwide, is developing in the tropical Pacific.


Experts said that if the seas become warmer than usually, air temperatures will undoubtedly become higher.




Unite together


Experts point out that the extreme weather, ecosystem degradation, glacier retreat, and other phenomena caused by global warming will have a serious impact on human survival and development in the future. The international community should unite to address climate change.


In China, efforts are being made both on the national and personal levels to address climate change. The country has set clear "dual carbon" goals at the national level and is currently vigorously implementing its emission reduction commitments.


China has pledged to have CO2 emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060, demonstrating China's active participation in global governance in response to climate change, experts said.


China is now the world's biggest investor in renewable energy, accounting for about 30 percent of total global investment in the area each year since 2015, Xinhua reported.


Sun noted that China has made great contributions to the international community in climate change, including actively joining in and promoting the negotiations of international treaties on climate change as well as pushing forward bilateral cooperation in climate and ecology.


In 2022, Wuhan in Central China's Hubei Province, hosted the 14th Meeting of the Conference of the Contracting Parties (COP14) to the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, together with the city of Geneva in Switzerland, which facilitated the adoption of the Global Strategic Framework for Wetland Conservation 2025-2030 that aims to curb wetland degradation.


Additionally, China held the presidency of COP15, known as the 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity. It led the parties involved to adopt a landmark deal, the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, for reversing biodiversity loss.


At the eco forum in Guiyang which concluded on Sunday, the "Guiyang Declaration" was unveiled and is set to focus on cherishing the beauty of nature, promoting green development, and advancing the construction of a high quality nature reserve system.


Meanwhile, Guizhou Province and the Colombian province of Narino signed an agreement to promote pragmatic cooperation in various fields, particularly in key areas such as green development and the digital economy at the forum.






Workers rush to produce solar photovoltaic modules for domestic and foreign market at a solar energy company in Haian High-tech Zone, East China's Jiangsu province on June 17, 2023. Photo: IC


Get everyone involved


Michia Molemoeng Mocho, national committee member of the Young Communist League of South Africa, said at a sub-forum in Guiyang that Western media outlets always talk about China but what she saw in-country was totally different.


"I saw people taking care of the environment and the environment is taking care of them. What I like is the commitment and dedication of the people to see the dream of an eco-friendly society coming to [reality]," she said.


Former UNEP Executive Director Erik Solheim stressed that China has made great achievements in green development and through the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), China shares its valuable experiences with other countries to promote green development.


China aims to enhance cooperation in multiple areas with the countries along the Belt and Road by 2025 and form a green development pattern for the initiative by 2030, according to a guideline issued by the National Development and Reform Commission along with three relevant departments.


Cooperation on clean energy will be deepened as China encourages solar and wind power companies to "go global," and promotes technological cooperation in areas including renewable energy, advanced nuclear power, smart grids, and hydrogen energy, said the guideline. Meanwhile, new-energy vehicles and smart transportation plans will be promoted to the countries along the route of Belt and Road.


China's export of three tech-intensive green products, namely solar batteries, lithium-ion batteries, and electric vehicles, registered a 66.9 percent increase in the first quarter of 2023, official data showed. Together, they contributed 2 percentage points to overall export growth, up from 1.7 percentage points in 2022, Xinhua reported.


At Monday's media briefing, China's Foreign Ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said that China sees lucid waters and lush mountains as humanity's invaluable assets. "Ecological conservation is an important priority and we are committed to green and low-carbon development," she said.


This week is the 33rd National Energy Conservation Week and July 12 marks this year's national low-carbon day in China.


"To advocate a simple, moderate, green, and low-carbon lifestyle and get everyone involved in actions to conserve energy and reduce carbon emissions is the key to achieving green and low-carbon development and enhancing ecological conservation, and also part of China's vigorous effort to respond to climate change and promote harmony between humanity and nature," Mao noted.




https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202307/1294237.shtml


People daily 2
China and solutions to climate change
By K. J. Noh & Michael Wong (People's Daily Online) 17:01, November 23, 2021
The Earth’s greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations are at their highest levels in 3 million years, driving catastrophic climate change, and creating an existential threat to the planet. But there is a way out.
Last year, Chinese President Xi Jinping pledged that China would have CO2 emissions peak before 2030, and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060.
China has a track history of setting ambitious, nearly impossible goals and then achieving them--often before deadline--so this pledge is significant. Under the CPC, China has already created “an economic miracle” in transforming China into the largest economy in the world. It ended extreme poverty while creating the largest middle class in the world. It has virtually contained COVID through non-pharmaceutical methods, while vaccinating up to 20 million people daily, and pledging the largest number of vaccines (2.2 Billion) and distributing over 1.7 Billion does-to the rest of the world. It has also been applying this incredible focus and national resolve to tackle Climate change.
China has the greatest program of renewable energy of any country. It generates more renewable power than North, Central, and South America–42 countries–combined. It has more solar parks and wind farms than any other country. Last year it built more wind power than the rest of the world combined.
It has more electric vehicles than any other country: it operates 466,000 electric buses, 99% of the world’s total; Shenzhen alone has 16,000 e-buses and 22,000 e-taxis. China had 5.80 million new energy vehicles by May 2021, accounting for about 50% of the global total. Its high speed rail network of over 37,900 km is so extensive and effective that domestic air travel is starting to become obsolete. No country has as dense, large, and efficient system of clean public transportation and high-speed rail as China.
In addition, China also has the greatest carbon-sequestration afforestation program in the world, creating forests more than the size of Belgium every year. It has doubled its forest coverage to 23% over the past 40 years. Satellite analysis by NASA’s Ames Research Lab proves that China has contributed more to greening the planet than any other country in the world.
In other words, by almost every sustainability index, China a world leader--far ahead of the US--and is pioneering a way forward for the planet. It will likely hit its targets ahead of time.
These things are happening because the CPC has written sustainability and ecological development directly into its constitution. This is then implemented into regional and local policy, such as sustainable eco-city mandates, transportation policy, energy infrastructure, advanced research, as well as dedicated funding for alternative energy development for companies to start up and build clean energy technology.
These commitments exist despite the fact that China’s historical and per capita GHG and CO2 emissions are a fraction of the world’s total. According to the World Bank, on an annual per capita basis, China share is less than half of the United States; its household energy consumption is 1/8th of US’s.
Even more important, here’s a chart showing the cumulative emissions by country.


Cumulative historical amounts matter because CO2 does not dissipate but accrues in the atmosphere: stocks, not flows, are what matter. In accounting, you look at a person’s total accrued debt, not their daily credit expenditures, to determine what they owe to others. Likewise, you have to look at historically accrued GHG to accurately understand harms, liabilities, and mitigation responsibilities.
Note also, one-third of China’s annual GHG emissions–are the West’s that has been offshored through manufacturing. This way, the West gets to have its cake and eat it, too: consume, pollute and destroy the planet, while virtue-signaling and blaming developing countries like China for the cost of Western consumption.
Much, too, has been made of China’s coal plants, but the fact is that China’s plants are advanced supercritical or ultra-supercritical plants, which means they are much more efficient and cleaner than many of the industrial-era legacy plants of the US. China has a more sustainable approach along the entire chain of production and consumption. That said, China understands coal as a transitional source that it wants to phase out. China needs to maintain b¬ack-up capacity in clean coal, as it leapfrogs into renewables, which will constitute fully 80% of its energy portfolio by 2060. As for overseas coal plants, 87% of global investment comes from the West or Japan, and China has committed to not fund any more foreign coal plants. With these commitments, China has demonstrated that it is dedicated and committed to both national and global sustainability and carbon neutrality.
Lastly, most calculations of GHG emissions leave out the US military boot print, the single largest institutional emitter in the world, ranking higher than the emissions of 140 nations. Add the cost of endless US wars, and subtract offshored GHG from the West from China’s total, you get a different picture of responsibility for global emissions.
Despite the hypocritical finger-pointing at China at COP 26 by the worst polluters, the US and the West, the simple facts refute the lies. The Lancet showed that 92% of emissions above the safe level of 350ppm can be attributed to the Global North, of which 40% of these emissions are the US’s alone. By contrast, China is a net creditor nation. In other words, the atmosphere (atmospheric carrying capacity), a global commons, has been colonized and monopolized by the West to the detriment of the rest of the world. In this, the US bears the greatest individual responsibility for the global climate crisis.
Despite all this, China leads in solutions--in technology, policy, transition planning, and implementation. It is not only pulling its weight, it is showing the world a way forward.
This is in stark distinction to the US, where 25% of elected officials in the 117th US Congress refuses to believe in human-caused climate change and where the last President claimed that “Global warming was a Chinese hoax”. The US was also responsible for disabling the original 1997 Kyoto protocol by lowering targets, engineering carbon indulgences (“carbon trading”), exempting military emissions, and unjustly trying to offload responsibility to developing countries. After all this cynical, rapacious, profit-driven sabotage, the US still refused to ratify, demoralizing global efforts for decades. These cynical actions by US leadership, along with US overshoot of its share of the carbon budget, bear a large responsibility for the current critical state of affairs.
Despite decades of denialism, evasion, and sabotage by the US, there is still a path forward to tackle climate change. But the US needs to step up to do its part and it needs to engage honestly with China’s sustainable, ecological model of development. With low-carbon eco-cities with 40% greenspace, pollution-free mass transit, mass afforestation, GHG capture technologies, mass shift to renewables, ecological mandates written into their constitution, China offers an inspiring and feasible policy model.
But this cannot happen if the US continues to denigrate and attack everything positive China does. By constantly bashing and attacking China, instead of engaging and learning from the structural solutions they are implementing, the US is abdicating its duties as a responsible global stakeholder and undermining—yet again--the world’s chances of tackling climate change.
In the recent China-US Joint Glasgow Declaration on Enhancing Climate Action in the 2020s, the US momentarily dropped its China-bashing, and pledged to strengthen implementation of the Paris agreement.
However, the constant demonization of China by the US leadership, not only on climate change, but on all fronts, along with endless echo-chambering in the mainstream media, would suggest that this is not a good faith change of heart, but only a temporary tactical reset. The fact that the US still bans Chinese polysilicon for environment-critical solar panels on fraudulent charges is evidence of this dishonest opportunism.
For the sake of the planet, sanity must prevail to seek real win-win cooperation on all fronts to tackle the existential threat of our time. China is doing its part by demonstrating what an ecological, sustainable civilization based on socialist common prosperity could look like.
Will the neoliberal West and the US follow suit, learn and cooperate, or will they play at politics and war, doubling down on the suicidal capitalist endgame?
Clear-sighted citizens must challenge the lies, the mendacity, and the escalating demonization, and urge their governments to work for peace and cooperation.
The future of the world depends on it.  
K.J. Noh is a scholar, educator and journalist focusing on the geopolitics of the Asia-Pacific and global public health. He recently pioneered a study with Dr. Claudia Chaufan on the military transmission of infectious diseases and its implications for Covid transmission.
Michael Wong is a long time peace activist, the Vice President of the San Francisco chapter of Veterans for Peace.  
The opinions expressed in this article reflect those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect those of People's Daily Online.
(Web editor: Zhong Wenxing, Liang Jun)


http://en.people.cn/n3/2021/1123/c90000-9923282.html






People daily 3
China and US push forward climate actions
By Hou Liqiang (China Daily) 09:55, September 10, 2024
China and the United States will make joint efforts to ensure a successful United Nations climate change conference in November, a key task of which will be to set a new financial target for supporting developing countries in their climate actions.
The announcement came after a three-day meeting of the China-US Working Group on Enhancing Climate Action in the 2020s, which was hosted by China in Beijing from Wednesday to Friday. The meeting was co-chaired by Liu Zhenmin, China's special envoy for climate change, and John Podesta, senior adviser to the US president for international climate policy.
The two sides continued their discussions on tackling the climate crisis, including the implementation of the 2030 Nationally Determined Contributions and preparation of their 2035 NDCs, according to a media release on Sunday from the Ministry of Ecology and Environment.
Nationally determined contributions are part of a climate action plan under the landmark 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change to cut greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to climate impacts. Each party to the Paris Agreement, which aims to keep the global temperature increase this century to well below 2 C above pre-industrial levels, and limiting it to 1.5 C, is required to establish an NDC and update it every five years.
The ministry's release said the two sides welcomed the technical and policy exchanges that have been conducted under the working group, including discussions on energy transition, methane, circular economy and resource efficiency, as well as low-carbon and sustainable provinces, states and cities.
While reaffirming their intention to jointly host a summit on methane and other non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gases at the UN COP29 climate change conference, the two sides also discussed encouraging participation from other parties, according to the release.
COP29, formally known as the 29th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, is scheduled to be held from Nov 11 to 22 in Baku, Azerbaijan.
Recalling their commitments to advancing efforts to halt and reverse forest loss by 2030, China and the US expressed their intention to continue discussion and cooperation in this regard, the ministry release said. Furthermore, the two countries will continue to enforce laws on banning illegal imports and promote global forest conservation and sustainable management.
The two countries also are committed to further strengthening dialogue and collaborative efforts, together with other parties, to support Azerbaijan for successful outcomes at COP29, including reaching the New Collective Quantified Goal on climate finance and making progress on setting rules for Article 6 of the accord, which allows countries to cooperate with each other to achieve emission reduction targets.
The New Collective Quantified Goal, a key element of the Paris treaty, is designed to set a new financial target to support developing countries in their post-2025 climate actions. Regarding Article 6, parties to the treaty have so far failed to agree on detailed rules after years of negotiation.
China and the US reached a consensus to establish the working group during COP26, in Glasgow, United Kingdom, in 2021, vowing to meet regularly to address the climate crisis and advance the multilateral process.
The two sides held the first meeting of the working group in Washington on May 8 and 9.
(Web editor: Tian Yi, Liang Jun)
http://en.people.cn/n3/2024/0910/c90000-20217140.html


People daily 4
China actively tackles climate change at home and abroad
By Sheng Chuyi (People's Daily Online) 14:15, December 18, 2023
As a Chinese poem says, "Heaven does not speak, yet it alternates the four seasons; Earth does not speak, yet it nurtures all things." Throughout history, the Chinese people have harbored deep reverence for nature, striving for harmonious coexistence between humans and the natural world.
However, the pursuit of material wealth and rapid development has come at the cost of intensified exploitation of natural resources, leading to frequent extreme weather events, biodiversity loss, and worsening desertification.
Climate change, the defining crisis of our time, presents pressing and formidable challenges worldwide. No country is immune to this crisis. In response, China has proactively addressed climate change both domestically and internationally, shouldering its responsibilities.
Standing at the center of global climate governance
Ma Aiming, deputy director of the National Center for Climate Change Strategy and International Cooperation (NCSC), told People's Daily online in an exclusive interview that China is committed to forming a "fair, reasonable, and win-win global climate cooperation framework."


Ma Aiming, deputy director of the National Center for Climate Change Strategy and International Cooperation (NCSC), receives an exclusive interview with People's Daily Online. (People's Daily Online/Li Jianyue)
China plays a constructive role in climate negotiations. "We are signatories to the U.N. Climate Change Convention, the Kyoto Protocol, and the Paris Agreement," Ma explained. The country has also been deeply involved in the construction and reform of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, submitting thousands of proposals from the Chinese government and scientists.
Additionally, China actively participates in South-South cooperation on climate change, providing assistance and support to other developing countries. "We have signed about 40 documents to collaborate with other developing countries by donating equipment necessary to combat climate change and offering training opportunities," said Ma.
Launching the world’s largest carbon market
China's commitment to green and low-carbon development is crucial for global climate governance. In July 2021, China's national carbon market commenced online trading, marking a significant move toward achieving its "dual carbon goals" of peaking carbon emissions by 2030 and achieving carbon neutrality by 2060.
Initially targeting the power sector, responsible for over 40 percent of China's energy-related CO2 emissions, the plan is to gradually expand China's national carbon emissions trading market to other energy-intensive sectors. These sectors include steel, non-ferrous metals, building materials, and chemicals.
“In the past two years, I think the market has been going smoothly. And I think what is important is that it sends a very clear signal to the whole country: we are serious about controlling our CO2 emissions. And companies and industries can benefit from their actions of reducing greenhouse gases,” Ma noted.
As the second performance period of the national carbon market approaches, the Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE) is exploring new ways to enhance the efficacy of China’s national market. “The MEE has required some research institutes to work on the possible expansion of market coverage,” said Ma. He also mentioned that China is on track to relaunch the China Certified Emission Reduction program, a voluntary mechanism where participants can earn carbon credits to trade.
Coordinating environmental protection and economic development
Curbing carbon emissions doesn't have to hinder economic development. China's low-carbon transition aims to strike a dynamic balance between energy security and carbon emission reduction, tailored to its national circumstances. “We have to balance both our energy conservation and development needs,” said Ma.
In response to increasing calls to reduce coal power usage, China has intensified its efforts to lower the share of coal in its energy mix and accelerated the development of renewable energy. However, Ma emphasized that solutions like strict power rationing that risks blackouts are not ideal. Abruptly phasing out coal-fired power without ensuring power supply and security could lead to negative economic and social impacts.
“At this moment, coal accounts for something like 56 percent or 57 percent of our energy supply. We cannot phase out coal overnight; it needs a process. We have to do it in maybe 10 years, 15 years, or 20 years. We have to do it gradually,” Ma noted.
(Guo Siqi, as an intern, also contributed to this article.)
(Web editor: Sheng Chuyi, Wu Chengliang)


http://en.people.cn/n3/2023/1218/c90000-20111758.html


The phipphine star 1




SINGAPORE — Climate change is making the Philippines more vulnerable to tropical storms, with rising temperatures already putting the country at nearly double the risk of deadly typhoons, scientists said in a report published on Thursday.
The unprecedented formation of four typhoons around the Philippines last month was made 70% more likely as a result of global temperature rises of 1.3 degrees Celsius (2.3 degrees Fahrenheit), researchers with the World Weather Attribution group said in a report published on Thursday.
Though scientists are cautious when it comes to attributing individual weather events to climate change, the consensus is that warmer oceans are intensifying rainfall and wind speeds across the globe.
“Climate change made the conditions that formed and fueled the typhoons nearly twice as likely,” the group said.
Hundreds of thousands of people were evacuated and more than 170 people killed during an unprecedented sequence of six tropical cyclones that landed in the country in October and November, raising concerns that storm activity was being turbocharged by higher sea surface temperatures.
“The storms were more likely to develop more strongly and reach the Philippines at a higher intensity than they otherwise would have,” said Ben Clarke, a weather researcher at Imperial College London, one of the report’s authors.
If temperatures rise to 2.6 Celsius above pre-industrial levels, those same storm conditions would be 40% more likely compared to now, he added.
An analysis published last month by U.S. weather researchers Climate Central said that hurricanes had intensified significantly as a result of record-breaking ocean warming, with wind speeds up by 18 miles per hour (29 kph).
Scientists believe warmer ocean temperatures are intensifying tropical storms by increasing the rate of evaporation. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said in its latest assessment that there was “high confidence” that global warming would make storms more intense.
It is still unclear whether or not rising temperatures would extend the normal typhoon season or make tropical storms more frequent, but climate activists are concerned.
“We used to have what we called a hazard calendar – now it is just basically the whole year around,” said Afrhill Rances, the Philippines’ representative with the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
—Reporting by David Stanway; editing by Philippa Fletcher


https://interaksyon.philstar.com/politics-issues/2024/12/13/288624/climate-change-putting-philippines-at-double-risk-of-typhoons-scientists-say/


The phipphine star 2
Fossil carbon dioxide emissions hit record high yet again in 2023
By The Conversation - December 6, 2023 - 4:42 PM
Share
by Pep Canadell, Corinne Le Quéré, Glen Peters, Judith Hauck, Julia Pongratz, Philippe Ciais, Pierre Friedlingstein, Robbie Andrew and Rob Jackson via The Conversation
Global emissions of fossil carbon dioxide (CO₂), in yet another year of growth, will increase by 1.1% in 2023. These emissions will hit a record 36.8 billion tonnes. That’s the finding of the Global Carbon Project’s 18th annual report card on the state of the global carbon budget, which we released today.
Fossil CO₂ includes emissions from the combustion and use of fossil fuels (coal, oil and gas) and cement production. Adding CO₂ emissions and removals from land-use change, such as deforestation and reforestation, human activities are projected to emit 40.9 billion tonnes of CO₂ in 2023.
The world’s vegetation and oceans continue to remove about half of all CO₂ emissions. The rest builds up in the atmosphere and is causing increasing warming of the planet.
At current emission levels, the remaining carbon budget for a one-in-two chance to limit warming to 1.5°C will likely be exceeded in seven years, and in 15 years for 1.7°C. The need to cut emissions has never been so urgent.
Emissions from every fossil source are up
Fossil CO₂ emissions now account for about 90% of all CO₂ emissions from human activities. Emissions from every single fossil source increased this year compared to 2022:
* coal (41% of global CO₂ emissions) up 1.1%
* oil (32%) up 1.5%
* natural gas (21%) up 0.5%
* cement (4%) up 0.8%.
Although global emissions have increased, the picture for individual countries is more diverse. There are some signs of progress towards decarbonization.
China’s emissions (31% of the global total) increased by 4% with growth in all fossil fuel sources. The highest relative growth was from oil emissions. This was in part due to the transport sector’s recovery after COVID-19 pandemic shutdowns.
The United States’ emissions (14% of global) are down by 3%. The rapid retirement of coal-fired power plants drove most of this decline. US coal emissions are the lowest since 1903.
India’s emissions (8% of global) increased by 8.2%. Emissions for all fossil fuels grew by 5% or more, with coal the highest at 9.5%. India is now the world’s third-largest fossil CO₂ emitter.
European Union emissions (7% of global) are down by 7.4%. This decline was due to both high renewable energy penetration and the impacts on energy supply of the war in Ukraine.
During the decade of 2013-2022, 26 countries had declining fossil CO₂ emission trends while their economies continued to grow. The list includes Brazil, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Romania, South African, United Kingdom and USA.
Total CO₂ emissions are near a peak
While fossil CO₂ emissions continue to increase, net emissions from land-use change, such as deforestation (CO₂ source), minus CO₂ removals, such as reforestation (CO₂ sink), appear to be falling. However, estimates of emissions from land-use change are highly uncertain and less accurate overall than for fossil fuel emissions.
Our preliminary estimate shows net emissions from land-use change were 4.1 billion tonnes of CO₂ in 2023. These emissions follow a small but relatively uncertain decline over the past two decades.
The declining trend was due to decreasing deforestation and a small increase in reforestation. The highest emitters are Brazil, Indonesia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These three countries contribute 55% of net global CO₂ emissions from land-use change.
When we combine all CO₂ emissions from human activities (fossil and land use), we find very little trend in total emissions over the past decade. If confirmed, this would imply global CO₂ emissions from human activities are not growing further but remain at very high record levels.
Stable CO₂ emissions, at about 41 billion tonnes per year, will lead to continuing rapid CO₂ accumulation in the atmosphere and climate warming. To stabilise the climate, CO₂ emissions from human activities must reach net zero. This means any residual CO₂ emissions must be balanced by an equivalent CO₂ removal.
Nature’s a big help, with a little human help
Terrestrial vegetation and ocean absorb about half of all CO₂ emissions. This fraction has remained remarkably stable for six decades.
Besides the natural CO₂ sinks, humans are also removing CO₂ from the atmosphere through deliberate activities. We estimate permanent reforestation and afforestation over the past decade have removed about 1.9 billion tonnes of CO₂ per year.
This is equivalent to 5% of fossil fuel emissions per year.
Other non-vegetation strategies are in their infancy. They removed 0.01 million tonnes of CO₂.
Machines (direct air carbon capture and storage) pulled 0.007 million tonnes of CO₂ out of the atmosphere. Enhanced weathering projects, which accelerate natural weathering processes to increase the CO₂ uptake by spreading certain minerals, accounted for the other 0.004 million tonnes. This is more than a million times smaller than current fossil fuel emissions.
The remaining carbon budget
From January 2024, the remaining carbon budget for a one-in-two chance to limit global warming to 1.5°C has been reduced to 275 billion tonnes of CO₂. This budget will used up in seven years at 2023 emission levels.
The carbon budget for limiting warming to 1.7°C has been reduced to 625 billion tonnes of CO₂, with 15 years left at current emissions. The budget for staying below 2°C is 1,150 billion tonnes of CO₂ – 28 years at current emissions.
Reaching net zero by 2050 requires total anthropogenic CO₂ emissions to decrease on average by 1.5 billion tonnes of CO₂ per year. That’s comparable to the fall in 2020 emissions resulting from COVID-19 measures (-2.0 billion tonnes of CO₂).
Without additional negative emissions (CO₂ removal), a straight decreasing line of CO₂ emissions from today to 2050 (when many countries aspire to achieve net zero CO₂ or the more ambitious net zero for all greenhouse gases) would lead to a global mean surface temperature of 1.7°C, breaching the 1.5°C limit.
Renewable energy production is at a record high and growing fast. To limit climate change fossil and land-use change, CO₂ emissions must be cut much more quickly and ultimately reach net zero.




https://interaksyon.philstar.com/trends-spotlights/2023/12/06/266387/fossil-carbon-dioxide-emissions-hit-record-high-yet-again-in-2023/
The phipphine star 3


apan issued heatstroke alerts Sunday to tens of millions of people as near-record high temperatures scorched swathes of the country, while torrential rain pummelled other regions.
National broadcaster NHK warned viewers that the heat was at life-threatening levels, as temperatures soared to nearly 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) in some places, including the capital Tokyo.
"Please stay hydrated and use air conditioners appropriately, and refrain from outings that seem difficult," a news presenter said. — AFP
June 17, 2022
Developing countries voice "disappointment" as climate talks in Germany ended Thursday with frustrations flaring over a lack of momentum on helping vulnerable nations cope with the impacts of warming.
With world attention drawn towards other challenges, notably Russia's invasion of Ukraine and spiralling food, energy and economic crises, the technical discussions meant to lay the groundwork for key United Nations negotiations later this year were mired in disagreements.
Representatives of nearly 200 countries arrived in the city of Bonn buoyed by the ambition displayed six months ago during the UN COP26 negotiations in Glasgow, where countries rallied around the urgent threat of climate change.
"After that sense of emergency had been established, probably the expectations were very high," says Preety Bhandari, senior climate adviser at the World Resources Institute. — AFP
June 6, 2022
Negotiators from almost 200 countries will meet in Bonn Monday for climate talks tasked with reigniting momentum on tackling global warming, as Russia's invasion of Ukraine overshadows the threat from rising emissions.
The conference will set the stage for a fresh round of major United Nations talks later this year in Egypt.
It will also be a chance to test the resolve of nations facing a catalogue of crises, including escalating climate impacts, geopolitical tensions, bloodshed in Ukraine and the threat of a devastating global food crisis.
"Climate change is not an agenda we can afford to push back on our global schedule," said outgoing UN climate change chief Patricia Espinosa ahead of the meeting. — AFP
May 24, 2022
Nations in the G20 group of major economies have yet to strengthen greenhouse gas reduction goals despite agreeing to revisit their plans ahead of critical UN climate talks in November, according to an analysis by leading research NGOs seen exclusively by AFP.
At the Glasgow COP26 climate summit last year countries pledged to review inadequate plans for cutting carbon pollution this decade ahead of the COP27 conference.
Two G20 nations — India and Turkey — have failed to update their original carbon cutting plans submitted in 2015, as required under the Paris Agreement. 
Neither has non-G20 member Egypt, which will host the COP27 climate summit in November. — AFP
May 18, 2022
Four key climate change indicators all set new record highs in 2021, the United Nations said Wednesday, warning that the global energy system was driving humanity towards catastrophe.
Greenhouse gas concentrations, sea level rise, ocean heat and ocean acidification all set new records last year, the UN's World Meteorological Organization (WMO) said in its "State of the Global Climate in 2021" report.
"The global energy system is broken and bringing us ever closer to climate catastrophe," UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said of the findings. — AFP
March 16, 2022
The 193 members of the United Nations General Assembly adopt a resolution Tuesday supporting bicycles as a tool for combatting climate change.
The resolution, proposed by Turkmenistan, was passed unanimously and like all General Assembly resolutions is non-binding.
It calls on member states to "integrate the bicycle into public transportation, in urban and rural settings in developing and developed countries." — AFP
November 2, 2021
Climate change caused overwhelmingly by human activity is the primary source of the unprecedented forest fires regularly ravaging the western United States, according to a study published Monday.
Fires destroyed an average of 13,500 square kilometers (5,200 square miles) per year in the American west between 2001 and 2018 — twice as much as between 1984-2000.
"It's happened so much faster than we previously anticipated," Rong Fu, who led the study published by the US National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), told the Los Angeles Times. — AFP
October 25, 2021
Israel's Prime Minister Naftali Bennett on Sunday declares the fight against climate change a "national security" priority and pledged to "facilitate" investments in green energy.
Days before the COP26 global climate summit in the British city of Glasgow — which Bennett is due to attend — the Israeli government announced the creation of "working groups" on climate change.
"The climate crisis is one of the major issues on the world agenda," Bennett says, calling it a "new National Security Interest" of Israel.
"It concerns the lives of all of us, and also the lives of our children and grandchildren," he adds. "We are obligated to deal with it in Israel; it is at the core of our being." — AFP
October 22, 2021
US intelligence services said Thursday for the first time that climate change poses wide-ranging threats to the United States' national security and stability around the world.
More extreme weather "will increasingly exacerbate a number of risks to US national security interests, from physical impacts that could cascade into security challenges, to how countries respond to the climate challenge," the White House said in a summary of the intelligence reports.
The prediction was made in the first official assessment by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, or ODNI, which oversees the sprawling US intelligence apparatus. — AFP
October 14, 2021
Britain's Prince William on Thursday praises his father Charles for being "well ahead of the curve" on climate change, as the pair ramped up pressure ahead of the upcoming COP26 summit in Glasgow.
"He's had a really rough ride on that, and I think you know he's been proven to being well ahead of the curve, well beyond his time in warning about some of these dangers," William tells the BBC.
"But it shouldn't be that there's a third generation now coming along having to ramp it up even more," he adds. — AFP
October 14, 2021
The US Treasury announces Wednesday it will study how climate change is affecting communities and households in the United States.
The department's Financial Literacy and Education Commission will look into "how households, communities, and the smallest businesses experience financial resilience in the face of climate change and climate transition," Treasury says in a statement.
It will also focus on "how to map climate-related financial risks, and identify which groups and regions will be most impacted," and also study the best ways to deal with the threats, with an emphasis "on historically disadvantaged people and regions." — AFP
September 28, 2021
A group of the 107 biggest companies in Brazil on Monday called for the Bolsonaro government to strengthen its environmental commitments, just one month ahead of the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow. 
"Brazil should be a participant in climate negotiations," the companies said in an open letter published by the Brazilian Business Council for Sustainable Development (CEBDS), which is made up of companies representing 47 percent of the country's GDP. 
"Brazil must stay at the center of the this conversation, or risk enormous damage to the productive sector and Brazilian society," said the letter, which included signatures from big banks such as Bradesco, JBS -- the biggest meat producer in the world -- and Brazilian branches of multinational corporations such as Carrefour and Shell. — AFP
September 27, 2021
Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison, under pressure to adopt a 2050 net-zero carbon emissions target, said in an interview published Monday that he may not join this year's landmark UN climate summit in Glasgow.
Asked about attending the global climate crisis conference in November, Morrison told the West Australian newspaper: "We have not made any final decisions".
"I mean it is another trip overseas and I have been on several this year and spent a lot of time in quarantine," he was quoted as saying. — AFP
September 24, 2021
Tens of thousands of climate activists including Greta Thunberg are due to descend on German cities Friday ahead of the weekend general election to crank up the pressure on the candidates to succeed Angela Merkel.
As Germany's top parties hold final rallies ahead of Sunday's vote, the Fridays for Future youth marches will make the case that the political class has let down the younger generation.
"The political parties haven't taken the climate catastrophe seriously enough," Luisa Neubauer, who runs the group's German chapter, told AFP.
Neubauer said "big change" would only be possible "if we create pressure from the streets" and tell the major parties "now there are no more excuses". — AFP
May 27, 2021
The world may temporarily breach the 1.5-Celsius warming mark within the next five years, according to an updated assessment of global climate trends released Thursday.
The World Meterological Organization and Britain's Met Office said there was a 40 percent chance of the annual average global temperature surpassing 1.5C above pre-industrial temperatures — the aspirational warming limit of the Paris climate accord. 
According to the Met Office's updated global 10-year climate prediction, there is a 90 percent chance of at least one year between 2021-2025 being the hottest on record. —  AFP/Patrick Galey
April 23, 2021
President Joe Biden opens an international climate summit Thursday saying that the United States "isn't waiting" to lead on an issue of "moral and economic imperative."
"The cost of inaction keeps mounting. The United States isn't waiting," he says in the opening address of the two-day summit being hosted virtually by the White House. —  AFP
April 20, 2021
The United States will press all nations to reduce reliance on coal, Secretary of State Antony Blinken says Monday, in an implicit challenge to China as he vowed greater US leadership.
Casting climate change as a national security issue, Blinken warns both of major impact around the planet — and risks to the United States if it does not raise its own efforts.
"It's difficult to imagine the United States winning long-term strategic competition with China if we cannot lead the renewable energy revolution," Blinken says in a speech in Annapolis, Maryland. —  AFP/Shaun Tandon
December 11, 2020
Carbon emissions fell a record seven percent in 2020 as countries imposed pandemic lockdowns and restrictions on movement, the Global Carbon Project says Friday in its annual assessment.
The fall of an estimated 2.4 billion tons of CO2 equivalent is considerably larger than previous annual record declines, such as 0.9 billion tons at the end of World War II or 0.5 billion tons in 2009 at the height of the financial crisis, it said. — AFP
December 9, 2020
Earth remains on course to warm more than 3 degrees Celsius by the century's end despite a dip in greenhouse gas emissions due to the pandemic and pledges to curb pollution, the UN says Wednesday.
In its annual assessment of emissions levels, the UN's Environment Programme find that 2020's 7-percent fall in carbon pollution would have "negligible impact" on warming without a broad and rapid shift away from fossil fuels. —  AFP
December 8, 2020
An international group of researchers warns enormous stimulus packages to boost post-pandemic growth could worsen global warming with huge investments in fossil fuel activities. 
Around $12.8 trillion has been pledged to help companies and households recover from the worldwide crisis, with the G20 group of advanced economies accounting for about $11 trillion of that figure.
That is roughly three times more than what was promised following the global economic crisis in 2008. — AFP
December 3, 2020
From small island states to urbanised powerhouses, every country on Earth faces "multiplying and intensifying" threats to human health as climate change renders future pandemics and system collapses ever more likely, a major study concluded on Thursday.
A deadly mix of extreme heat, air pollution and intense farming are combining to produce the "worst outlook for public health our generation has seen", according to the Lancet's fifth annual report on the links between health and climate. 
The assessment showed that the last two decades have seen a 54 percent increase in heat-related deaths among older people, with extreme heatwaves claiming close to 300,000 lives in 2018 alone. 
While climate-linked phenomena such as tropical storms remain for now problems overwhelmingly faced by developing nations, the authors said extreme heat was already inflicting devastating damage to health in wealthier countries. — AFP
December 2, 2020
This year is on course to be one of the three warmest ever recorded and could even top the record set in 2016, the United Nations said Wednesday.
"2020 has, unfortunately, been yet another extraordinary year for our climate," said Petteri Taalas, secretary-general of the UN's World Meteorological Organization, as it unveiled its provisional 2020 State of the Global Climate report. —  AFP
December 2, 2020
Climate change is now the biggest threat to UN-listed natural world heritage sites like glaciers and wetlands, and has pushed Australia's Great Barrier Reef into "critical" condition, conservationists said Wednesday.
In a fresh report, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) revealed that shifts due to the changing climate now imperil a full third of the 252 UNESCO-listed natural sites around the globe.
The report "reveals the damage climate change is wreaking on natural World Heritage, from shrinking glaciers to coral bleaching to increasingly frequent and severe fires and droughts," IUCN Director-General Bruno Oberle said in a statement. —  AFP
November 14, 2020
Save the Children Philippines asks the national and local governments to address the climate crisis since extreme weather events continue "to compromise children’s rights to health and survival, learning, and protection from harm and exploitation."

“Children are inheriting a planet in crisis where extreme weather conditions are causing devastating typhoons, storm surges, and massive flooding that affect their well-being and future – even if they are not responsible for it,” says Atty. Alberto Muyot, chief executive officer of Save the Children Philippines.
November 11, 2020
Japanese engineering giant Toshiba will stop constructing new coal-fired power plants and shift to renewable energy in a bid to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, a spokeswoman said Wednesday.
"We still have ongoing projects, but we have decided to withdraw from building new coal-powered plants," company spokeswoman Yoko Takagi told AFP.
Toshiba, which currently has around 10 coal-fired station projects under way worldwide, is a major global player in the power sector.
The company will instead increase investment in renewable energy, including parts for offshore wind-power facilities and research and development for next-generation solar batteries, the spokeswoman said.
The announcement comes after Japan's Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga set a 2050 deadline for the world's third-largest economy to become carbon-neutral. -- AFP
October 4, 2020
With tender care, Sepp Rieser adorns the bulky heads of his reluctant cows with flower wreaths, adds some more fir twigs, and adjusts the large bells around their necks.
"I've been doing this since I was a little boy," Rieser says of the ancestral tradition in which cattle are decorated for their journey from the high Alpine Gramai pasture in Austria's western Tyrol state, where they graze all summer long, to the valley below where they'll spend the harsh winter months.
To Rieser, the festivities surrounding this journey to the village of Pertisau in the Karwendel mountains are as important as his birthday or Christmas.
Images of Jesus and the Virgin Mary feature in the adornments of his 90-strong herd, reflecting the region's strong Catholic heritage. 
But it could soon be a relic of the past: Sweeping economic changes as well as climate change are taking their toll on the landscape and threatening the future of the tradition as well as its bovine stars. — AFP
September 30, 2020
Some of Europe's biggest car giants including BMW and Jaguar Land Rover use leather linked to deforestation in South America, threatening the most vulnerable tribes, environmental NGO Earthsight says Wednesday.
It claims the automakers buy leather for vehicle interiors initially sourced from cattle ranching on illegally razed land in a part of Paraguay that is home to one of the world's last tribes with no contact with the outside world. 
The London-based organization says the leather from the Paraguayan Gran Chaco, a region rich in biodiversity that is home to jaguars and giant anteaters, enters the auto industry supply chains via Italian tanneries. 
The region's forests are being destroyed faster than any others in the world, it noted. — AFP
September 8, 2020
World powers must pull together and retool their economies for a green future or humanity is "doomed", UN chief Antonio Guterres has warned, telling AFP that failure to control the coronavirus pandemic illustrates the danger of disunity.
Before the virus struck, 2020 was billed as a pivotal year for the plan to dodge the bullet of catastrophic global warming, with high profile summits planned to catch a wave of public alarm over the future of the planet. 
The coronavirus crisis may have shunted climate into the sidelines as nations launched unprecedented shutdowns to try to slow its spread, but Guterres said the need for climate action was more urgent than ever.
In a searing assessment of the international response, Guterres said the pandemic should sharpen governments' focus on cutting emissions, urging them to use the crisis as a springboard to launch "transformational" policies aimed at weaning societies off fossil fuels. — AFP
March 8, 2020
As a child, Nguy Thi Khanh used to lie in the grass in her Vietnamese village and watch toxic emissions from nearby coal plants float past like clouds.
Today she is one of the few voices in Vietnam taking on the industry -- a rare female climate crusader pushing for renewables in a country where dirty energy is on the rise.
At 43, she has already founded Green ID, Vietnam's best-known environmental NGO, convinced the government to reduce some of its coal targets, helped spark a national conversation about rising air and water pollution, and won international plaudits for her work.
But it is not without risks: Dissent is not tolerated by the Vietnamese government and many activists have wound up in jail for speaking up against authorities. -- AFP
March 8, 2020
New analysis by the Nestpick 2050 Climate Change City Index says Bangkok could be hardest hit by global warming.
And while it is not alone facing such a threat — Venice, New Orleans, and Jakarta are predicted to be underwater by 2100 — it does have a secret weapon in its battle to negate the impact of a hotter planet: renowned architect Kotchakorn Voraakhom who preaches mindful development over mindless construction.
"We are talking life and death in this situation," says the 39-year-old who is hoping to bring Bangkok back from the brink, as scientists warn extreme weather — flooding and droughts — could ravage the city, leaving as much as 40 percent submerged in the next decade.
Kotchakorn says: "I don't want to face it with fear. At this moment we have a chance to make change... We have to do it right now to show the coming generations that this is possible. It is not about sitting and waiting and doing the same thing." — AFP
February 12, 2020
The global cost of air pollution caused by fossil fuels is US$8 billion a day, or roughly 3.3% of the world's GDP, an environmental research group says.
The findings from the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air and Greenpeace Southeast Asia are the first to assess the global cost of air pollution specifically from burning oil, gas and coal. — AFP
January 21, 2020
Some of the world's biggest banks, insurers and pension funds have collectively invested $1.4 trillion in fossil fuel companies since the Paris climate deal, Greenpeace said Tuesday at the start of the World Economic Forum in Davos. 
With the climate emergency expected to be front and centre at the annual summit of the world's business elite, the charity accused some institutions in attendance of failing to live up to the Forum's goal of "improving the state of the world".
Greenpeace analysed the portfolios of 24 of the banks represented at Davos and found that they had financed the fossil fuel industry to the tune of $1.4 trillion since the landmark 2015 Paris deal. 
That accord enjoins nations to limit global temperature rises to "well below" two degrees Celsius (3.6 Farenheit) through a rapid and wide-ranging drawdown of planet-warming carbon emissions. — AFP
January 19, 2020
Britain, a global leader in offshore wind energy, plans to make the sector one of the pillars of its transition to carbon neutrality in the coming decades.
The country aims to quadruple its offshore electricity production capacity by 2030 by utilising the windswept North Sea and a favourable policy environment.
"It's more conducive to build offshore in the UK than anywhere else in Europe," says James Brabben, of Cornwall Insight energy consultancy. — AFP
December 22, 2019
Thirty-eight years after he revived his family's small vineyard in northern Greece, Vangelis Gerovassiliou proudly gazes on his property that grows one of the country's most popular wines.
And after 45 years in the business, Gerovassiliou says that with a little local savvy, there are answers even to global warming.
"It's an opportunity for Greek winemakers to return to the original grape varieties, and to carefully choose the location of the vines on suitable land," he told AFP, adding that until recently, vineyards were planted "everywhere".
Growers in northern Greece, one of the country's top wine-producing areas, have been among the first nationally to be interested in the consequences of rising temperatures. -- AFP
December 13, 2019
EU leaders agreed at their summit to protect European businesses moving to renewable energy by applying a carbon levy on imports from less regulated suppliers, France says.
The European Commission is drawing up legislation to enshrine its Green Deal growth plan and a 2050 target for a carbon-neutral economy.
A French presidential official says this would include a mechanism to "tax foreign products on Europe's frontiers that don't respect the same climate rules as European firms." — AFP
December 12, 2019
An EU summit was at risk of being relocated to a neighbouring building on Thursday after Greenpeace activists scaled the planned venue with the intention of staying there as long as possible.
"The police are currently intervening. The summit will go ahead, but consideration is being given whether to relocate it to the Justus Lipsius building," said an internal message to EU staff.
Early Thursday, 28 Greenpeace activists scaled the facade of the EU's Europa building - where the heads of state and government will meet later in the day to discuss climate measures.
The team deployed a large banner saying "Climate Emergency" and remained gripped to the building. They also held flares. — Agence France-Presse
December 11, 2019
Swedish teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg was chosen as Time magazine's 2019 Person of the Year, the magazine announced Wednesday.
The 16-year-old has found herself in the role of spokesperson for a generation haunted by climate emergency since her solo strike against global warming outside Sweden's parliament last year.
The magazine cover has a picture of Thunberg with the subtitle "The Power of Youth." — Agence France-Presse
December 5, 2019
Parents from around the globe Thursday say governments locked in negotiations at UN talks in Madrid must beat back the threat of global warming to "give our children the future that they deserve".
"Our children are being handed a broken world on the verge of climate chaos and ecological breakdown," they say in an open declaration from 222 associations in 27 countries. 
"As parents, seeing this is agonizing."
The plea comes the day before young climate strikers led by Swedish teen activist Greta Thunberg plan to march through the Spanish capital under the Friday for Futures banner.  
— Agence France-Presse
December 2, 2019
Confronted with a climate crisis threatening civilization, humanity much choose between hope and surrender, UN chief Antonio Guterres tells the opening plenary of the UN COP25 climate conference Tuesday.
"One is the path of surrender, where we have sleepwalked past the point of no return, jeapordising the health and safety of everyone on this planet," Guterres says. -- Agence France-Presse
November 10, 2019
Icelandic seventh-grader Lilja Einarsdottir is on an unusual field trip with her class: they're measuring the Solheimajokull glacier to see how much it has shrunk in the past year, witnessing climate change first-hand.
"It is very beautiful but at the same time it is very sad to see how much it has melted," says Lilja, bundled up against the autumn chill in a blue pompom hat.
Each October since 2010, now-retired schoolteacher Jon Stefansson has brought students aged around 13 from a school in Hvolsvollur — a village about 60 kilometers (40 miles) away — to the glacier to record its evolution.
The results are chilling: nestled between two moss-covered mountain slopes, Solheimajokull has shrunk by an average of 40 metres (130 feet) per year in the past decade, according to the students' measurements. — Agence France-Presse
October 6, 2019
Pope Francis deplored the fires that ravaged the Amazon rainforest, which were "set by interests that destroy," in a homily at a synod on the region's isolated indigenous communities.
"The fire set by interests that destroy, like the fire that recently devastated Amazonia, is not the fire of the Gospel. The fire of God is warmth that attracts and gathers into unity," he says.
"It is fed by sharing, not by profits. The fire that destroys, on the other hand, blazes up when people want to promote only their own ideas, form their own group, wipe out differences in the attempt to make everyone and everything uniform." — AFP
October 3, 2019
After protests in New York and Montreal, teen activist Greta Thunberg has said she will join demonstrators in Iowa in the US Midwest on Friday for the latest "climate strike."
The 16-year-old Swede generated headlines around the world last week with her so-called "How Dare You?" speech at the UN climate summit, accusing world leaders of betraying her generation.
"This Friday I'm happy to say that I'll join the climate strike in Iowa City!" Thunberg says on Twitter on Wednesday, using the movement's hashtag "Fridays For Future."
"All we're saying is unite behind the science and listen to the scientists," she added. — Agence France-Presse
September 24, 2019
After a year spent protesting on the streets, it was Greta Thunberg's moment on the world stage, and she did not disappoint, accusing leaders of betrayal and repeatedly demanding "How dare you?" in a raw, emotional speech.
Since landing on US shores on a sailboat in August, the Swedish teen has spoken only briefly at public events, preferring to pass the mic to lesser-known activists so that more voices are heard.
Not so at Monday's Climate Action Summit, convened by UN chief Antonio Guterres to reinvigorate the Paris agreement, where Thunberg was determined to make the most of the allotted time. 
She began by telling the audience: "My message is that we'll be watching you," eliciting some laughter.
But it soon became clear that humor was not what she was going for.
"This is all wrong," Thunberg said, becoming visibly angry. "I shouldn't be up here. I should be back at school on the other side of the ocean." 
"Yet, you come to us young people for hope. How dare you?" the 16-year-old, who has taken time off from her education to focus on activism, thundered. 
"You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words, yet I'm one of the lucky ones. People are suffering, people are dying, entire ecosystems are collapsing.
"We are in the beginning of a mass extinction, and all you can talk about is the money and fairy tales of eternal economic growth. How dare you!" -- Agence France-Presse
September 23, 2019
Sixty-six countries have signaled their intent to achieve net zero carbon dioxide emissions by 2050, the United Nations says, seen as a vital goal in preventing catastrophic longer term climate change.
"In terms of the 2050 group, 66 governments are joined by 10 regions, 102 cities, 93 businesses and 12 investors — all committed to net zero CO2emissions by 2050," the office of UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres says in a statement. — AFP
August 8, 2019
The world must overhaul how it feeds itself and manages Earth's forests, pasture and resources in order to avoid food insecurity and the worst impacts of climate change, a landmark UN assessment says. 
The Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change warns that failure to act rapidly on reducing land degradation, food waste and agriculture's carbon footprint could challenge food systems and undermine efforts to head off disastrous global warming. — AFP
July 16, 2019
The Pacific's low-lying reef islands are likely to change shape in response to climate change, rather than simply sinking beneath rising seas and becoming uninhabitable as previously assumed, new research has found.
Atoll nations such as Tuvalu, Tokelau and Kiribati lie only a few meters above sea level and are considered the world's most vulnerable to global warming, with fears their populations will become climate refugees as waters rise.
But a study published this week found that such islands "morphodynamically respond" to the environment because they are composed of the skeletal remains of tiny reef-dwelling organisms, rather than solid rock.
March 13, 2019
A quarter of all premature deaths and diseases worldwide are due to manmade pollution and environmental damage, the United Nations says in a landmark report on the planet's parlous state.
Deadly smog-inducing emissions, chemicals polluting drinking water, and the accelerating destruction of ecosystems crucial to the livelihoods of billions of people are causing a worldwide epidemic that hampers the global economy, it warns. — AFP
October 8, 2018
Avoiding global climate chaos will require a transformation of society and the world economy that is "unprecedented in scale," the UN says in a landmark report, warning that time is running out to avoid disaster.
"Limiting global warming to 1.5C would require rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society," the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says in a statement.
To have at least a 50/50 chance of staying under the 1.5C cap without overshooting the mark, the world must, by 2050, become "carbon neutral," according to the report.
"That means every tonne of CO2 we put into the atmosphere will have to be balanced by a tonne of CO2 taken out," says lead coordinating author Myles Allen, head of the University of Oxford's Climate Research Programme.
At current levels of greenhouse gas emissions, Earth could warm by 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) as early as 2030, the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change says in a landmark report.
"Global warming is likely to reach 1.5C between 2030 and 2052 if it continues to increase at the current rate," the report concluded with "high confidence."
Earth's surface has warmed one degree Celsius (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit)—enough to lift oceans and unleash a crescendo of deadly storms, floods and droughts—and is on track toward an unliveable 3C or 4C rise.
Relevant. Witty. Daily
Morning news briefings from Philstar.com






https://www.philstar.com/happens/514


Climate change
August 20, 2023 | 4:51pm
Location: PHILIPPINES
Philippine daily inquirer 1
“Amid Earth’s heat records, annual carbon emissions still inching upward”


Even as Earth sets new heat records, humanity this year is pumping 330 million tons (300 million metric tons) more carbon dioxide into the air by burning fossil fuels than it did last year.
This year the world is on track to put 41.2 billion tons (37.4 billion metric tons) of the main heat-trapping gas into the atmosphere. It’s a 0.8 percent increase from 2023, according to Global Carbon Project, a group of scientists who track emissions. Several United Nations reports say the globe must cut emissions by 42 percent by 2030 to possibly limit warming to an internationally agreed-upon threshold.This year’s pollution increase isn’t quite as large as last year’s 1.4 percent jump, scientists said while presenting the data at the United Nations climate talks in Azerbaijan.If the world continues burning fossil fuels at today’s level, it has six years before passing 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels, the limit agreed to at the 2015 climate talks in Paris, said study coauthor Stephen Sitch. The Earth is already at 1.3 degrees Celsius (2.3 Fahrenheit), according to the United Nations.
“We clearly are not doing enough on a global scale to reduce emissions. It’s as simple as that,” said study coauthor Mike O’Sullivan, a University of Exeter climate scientist. “We need to massively increase ambition and actually just think outside the box of how we can change things, not be so tied to fossil fuel interests.”
Scientists used reported emissions from rich countries and oil industry data, O’Sullivan said. The 2024 figure includes projections for the last couple months or so. The Global Carbon Project team released figures for the four biggest carbon emitters—China, the United States, India, and Europe. It also produced more detailed and final figures for about 200 countries for 2023.
The continued rise in carbon emissions is mostly from the developing world and China. Many analysts had been hoping that China—by far the world’s biggest annual carbon polluting nation with 32 percent of the emissions—would have peaked its carbon dioxide emissions by now. Instead China’s emissions rose 0.2 percent from 2023, with coal pollution up 0.3 percent, Global Carbon Project calculated. But it could drop to zero in the next two months and is “basically flat,” O’Sullivan said.
Total carbon emissions—which include fossil fuel pollution and land use changes such as deforestation—are basically flat because land emissions are declining, the scientists said. That’s an important and encouraging milestone amid bad news, said University of Pennsylvania climate scientist Michael Mann.
Click to read: https://plus.inquirer.net/news/amid-earths-heat-records-annual-carbon-emissions-still-inching-upward/
 
Philippine daily inquirer 2
“Heat, air pollution, disease: How climate change affects health”


PARIS—Record-breaking heat, extreme weather events, air pollution and the spread of infectious disease: Climate change poses an already vast yet rising threat to the health of humans around the world, experts warn.
The latest round of UN climate talks begins next week during what is expected to be the hottest year in recorded history—and in the shadow of climate-skeptic Donald Trump’s reelection as US president.
The COP29 negotiations will be held in Azerbaijan as the world continues to emit increasing levels of planet-heating fossil fuels, even as many nations have been lashed by devastating floods, droughts, heat waves and storms.
“Climate change is making u
Click to read: https://plus.inquirer.net/news/heat-air-pollution-disease-how-climate-change-affects-health/?utm_source=chatgpt.com
 
Philippine daily inquirer 3
“Greenhouse gas levels reached new record highs in 2023”


The United Nations reported that greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere surged again in 2023, presenting the possibility that further global warming is likely to follow. 
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Secretary-General Celeste Saulo warned humanity is unlikely to meet the Paris Agreement’s goal. The Paris Climate Accord involves numerous countries pledging to lower global warming to 2°C. However, the Greenhouse Gas Bulletin cautions that the world faces a “potential vicious cycle.” 
How much have greenhouse gas levels increased?
According to the official WMO website, carbon dioxide (CO2) is accumulating in the atmosphere by more than 10 percent within 20 years. That means CO2 levels have been building up in the air faster than ever in recorded history. Specifically, globally averaged surface concentrations reached 420.0 parts per million (ppm). That is 151 percent of pre-industrial levels before 1750, based on the Global Atmosphere Watch’s long-term observations. “Another year, another record,” WMO chief Saulo said.
“This should set alarm bells ringing among decision-makers. We are clearly off track to meet the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to well below 2°C…,” Saulo also said.
The WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin is one of the organization’s flagship publications for informing the UN Climate Change conference.It’s now in its 20th issue, and the carbon dioxide level has increased by 11.4 percent (42.9 ppm), higher than 377.1 ppm in 2004.
“The Bulletin warns that we face a potential vicious cycle,” said WMO Deputy Secretary-General Ko Barrett.
“Natural climate variability plays a big role in carbon cycle. But in the near future, climate change itself could cause ecosystems to become larger sources of greenhouse gases.” 
Consequently, more CO2 could stay in the atmosphere to accelerate global warming. These climate feedbacks are critical concerns to human society,” Barrett warned.
Click to read: https://technology.inquirer.net/138177/greenhouse-gas-levels-reached-new-record-highs-in-2023?utm_source=chatgpt.com
Daily inquirer 4
Renewables: A matter of survival
At the ongoing 28th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations (UN) Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28) in Dubai, Environment Secretary Maria Antonia Yulo-Loyzaga stated that the Philippines will boost its call to developed countries to fulfill their commitments to developing countries. The Philippine delegation, she said, is “working in seven major negotiating work streams: loss and damage, climate finance, adaptation, the global stocktake, the just transition [toward] a renewable energy future, … mitigation, and Article 6 [of the Paris Agreement] for greenhouse gas [GHG] emissions reduction and avoidance.” The 2015 Paris Agreement is a landmark international accord that calls for limiting the increase in the global average temperature to no more than 1.5 degrees Celsius and the reduction of GHG emissions by 45 percent by 2030, to reach net zero by 2050.
There is nothing wrong in a shotgun approach of targeting many goals at the same time, particularly in the marketing field. But in more efficient organizations, goals are specified and prioritized into what is the most achievable with the highest degree of positive impact, and putting a timeline on the activities needed to achieve it as soon as possible. For the Philippines, the most critical, as far as many environment groups are concerned, is a major push to shift to renewable energy and move away from fossil fuels.
1.5 degrees future is possible
Days before COP28 opened last week, the Center for Energy, Ecology, and Development (CEED) had urged the Philippine mission led by Yulo-Loyzaga to prioritize this agenda. As CEED deputy executive director Avril de Torres pointed out, “putting an end to the Philippines’ push for massive additional fossil fuel use … is an urgent policy shift that can get us on track” to the Paris Agreement target.
Climate Analytics, a global climate science and policy institute backed by various international organizations such as the UN Environment Programme, the European Commission, and the World Bank, released only last month a country-specific report titled “A 1.5 [degrees] future is possible: getting fossil fuels out of the Philippine power sector.” It described the study as the most detailed scenario modeling for the Philippine power sector to date. Its key finding is that “[t]he Philippines must urgently phase out coal-fired power by 2035, and almost entirely phase out gas-fired power generation by 2040.” Although this may sound too ambitious to local officials and industry players, the report concluded that it is not only feasible, but will also benefit the economy and provide more than a million jobs by 2050.
Fossil fuel phaseoutThe Germany-based Climate Analytics describes in detail what the Philippine government needs to do to get the country’s power sector onto an emissions pathway compatible with the Paris deal. It offers concrete policy suggestions for the Philippines to accelerate the fossil fuel phase-out. Warning that while the Philippines is on the global warming frontline given its archipelagic structure that increases its susceptibility to rising sea levels and changing weather patterns, fossil fuels still dominate the country’s energy system, accounting for 78 percent of power generation in 2022.
Data from the Department of Energy (DOE) show how little the country has tapped the most abundant renewable sources of energy. While the use of coal in power generation has risen sharply to 60 percent in 2022 from 34 percent in 2010, the combined use of hydroelectric and geothermal sources fell to 18 percent in 2022 from 26 percent in 2010 while wind and solar accounted for only 2.5 percent of the power mix.
This proves that despite official rhetoric, the power sector is not aligned with the Philippine emission reduction targets.
A matter of survivalAs the Climate Analytics report pointed out, the Philippine Energy Plan 2023-2050 will not meet the Paris Agreement goals as “its renewable energy targets are too low and there are no plans to phase out fossil fuels.’’
See Also
  

Commentary, Opinion
Filipino nurses and Australia’s new policy
The government should heed mounting calls to craft a well-defined plan for an expedited coal phase-out and expanding renewable energy to 99-percent coverage by 2050 to be in accord with the Paris Agreement. This should not be a difficult goal since the Philippines, as pointed out by the Climate Analytics report, has enough cost-effective renewable resources to both replace fossil fuels in the power sector and meet future energy demands. Abundant renewables include solar rooftop, open-field solar, and onshore/offshore wind energy.
The existing DOE measure against new coal-fired power projects is not enough. The government needs a firmer policy framework on transitioning existing coal- and gas-fed generators to renewable energy.
At the COP28, Special Assistant to the President Antonio Lagdameo Jr. said that President Marcos recognized that building climate resilience and pushing for low-carbon development in renewable energy is a “matter of survival’’ for the Philippines. With that recognition, there is no time to lose in making that inevitable shift to renewable power.


https://plus.inquirer.net/opinion/renewables-a-matter-of-survival/


Dawn 1
Climate change glossary: Terms you need to understand, explained
As the world warms due to climate change, threatening millions of lives and livelihoods, nothing is more urgent than clear communication about the changing climate and its consequences. But too often, discussions around climate change are heavy on jargon and technical terms, excluding the wider public from conversations of life-altering importance.
However, we cannot abandon precision and scientific rigour. A solid understanding of the key concepts relating to climate change is essential for the public to understand what is happening to our environment — and to think critically about how governments and powerful interests respond. The Third Pole has therefore prepared this climate change glossary, a guide to key terms in the climate conversation. We hope this will help to broaden understanding of climate change, and help those most impacted to add their voices to the debate.
This guide is available in English, Hindi, Nepali, Urdu and Bengali and will be regularly updated as new terminology enters conversations on climate change. Words in bold are terms that are explained elsewhere in this glossary.
123
1.5C and 2C
In 2022, the average global temperature was 1.15 degrees Celsius warmer than before the Industrial Revolution, thanks to anthropogenic climate change. As temperatures rise above this level, the threats posed to people, wildlife and natural systems escalate, thanks to more frequent and intense heatwaves, floods and droughts, disrupted rainfall patterns and rising sea levels, among other impacts.
To prevent such a scenario, the world’s governments pledged in 2015 to keep global warming below 2C, and to ‘pursue efforts’ to limit warming to 1.5C, with the signing of the Paris Agreement. The difference between 1.5C and 2C is critical. A world with 2C of warming would experience far more damaging, irreversible impacts from climate change, and would pass many dangerous climate tipping points.
A report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) notes that greenhouse gas emissions will have to peak by 2025, and be reduced by 43 per cent by 2030, if warming is to be kept within 1.5C.
Despite pledges, the world is not on track to achieve this. According to an IPCC report released in March 2023, warming is likely to exceed 1.5C this century, even under a low greenhouse gas emissions scenario.
A
Adaptation
‘Adaptation to climate change’ refers to the actions people and governments can take to reduce the harmful impacts of global warming on the environment, society, public health, and the economy. Meaningful adaptation to these impacts requires practical solutions tailored to each country, region and community.
Adaptation measures in South Asia could include developing and rolling out new varieties of drought-resistant crops; designing better flood defences to protect coastal cities or riverine communities; improving early warning systems for climate change-related disasters; and restoring natural ecosystems like mangroves, which can act as buffers against extreme weather. For more information on climate adaptation, read here.
Anthropogenic
Anthropogenic means something caused by humans. Historically, the Earth’s climate has changed slowly over thousands of years. But since the 1800s, human activities like burning fossil fuels and cutting down forests have changed the balance of gases in the atmosphere, leading to a drastic increase in global temperatures. These are examples of the anthropogenic causes of climate change.
B
Biodiversity
The variety of life found in a particular area is called biodiversity. This includes the animals, plants and microorganisms which interact with each other in an ecosystem, creating a network of life.
Protecting biodiversity is crucial for the survival of all life on Earth, including humanity, as the ecosystems we depend on to provide food, water and clean air can only function if a diverse variety of species is present in sufficient numbers. But biodiversity is currently under threat because of human activities, with up to 1 million plant and animal species estimated to be in danger of extinction.
Some of the main causes of biodiversity loss are changes in land use, such as deforestation and transformation of natural habitats for agriculture or mining; hunting and over-exploitation; invasive species; and climate change, among others.
Bioenergy and biofuels
Biofuels are liquid, solid or gaseous fuels that are produced from plant material and animal waste. Sugarcane, corn and soybeans are among the major sources currently used to produce biofuels. The energy produced with these fuels, or by burning biomass directly, is called bioenergy.
Advocates say that biofuels like bioethanol and biodiesel could help decarbonise the transport sector by offering a low-carbon alternative to fossil fuels. Total global demand for biofuel is set to increase by 22pc between 2022 and 2027. However, experts have warned about the impacts of dedicating land for biofuels, which could otherwise support food production and biodiversity. Critics argue that burning biofuels is not actually a low-carbon way to produce energy, and that figures that show biofuels to have a lower carbon footprint than fossil fuels may not account for all carbon released.
Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS)
When carbon generated during the production of bioenergy is captured and stored, and therefore does not enter the atmosphere, this is called BECCS (bio energy with carbon capture and storage). In theory this would mean energy is produced with a negative carbon footprint. Only a few BECCS projects are currently operational worldwide, and critics question the costs relating of diverting large areas of land to production of bioenergy, which could otherwise be used for food production or biodiversity.
Biomass
Biomass is any organic matter that comes from plants, animals and microorganisms, including organic waste from agriculture, forestry and other industries. Biomass can be burned directly to produce energy, or converted into biofuels.
C
Carbon credits and offsets
Carbon credits and carbon offsets are the two main types of carbon trading. Carbon credits are essentially tokens issued by governments to companies which represent future carbon emissions. Companies which emit less than their ‘allowance’ — and so end up with excess carbon credits — can then trade them on a carbon market. This is supposed to incentivise companies to reduce their emissions.
Carbon offsets are created by companies. If a company does something that removes carbon from the atmosphere, such as planting trees, it may count this as a carbon offset, and trade it with other organisations who wish to ‘neutralise’ the polluting impact of their processes. Individuals can also ‘offset’ their carbon emissions, generated by high-carbon activities such as flying, by donating to carbon removal projects, such as forestry programmes or renewable energy development.


A plane flies over New Delhi, India. Airline companies have spent vast amounts of money in recent years on carbon credits to ‘offset’ their emissions of planet-heating gases. (Image: Davidovich Mikhail / Alamy)
Carbon trading is controversial. Critics argue that in practice carbon markets allow rich countries, companies and individuals a way out of actually reducing their emissions, as they can simply spend to continue polluting, and that they are hard to manage effectively. The real carbon removal benefit of carbon offset projects has also been questioned, with some commentators arguing that their positive climate impact is inflated.
Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage (CCS and CCUS)
Carbon capture and storage (or CCS) is a process that directly traps carbon dioxide generated through industrial processes and injects it underground to prevent it from reaching the atmosphere. Carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) goes one step further by using the captured carbon in production of goods such as alcohols, biofuels, plastics or concrete.
Some commentators argue that carbon capture technologies have a significant role to play in climate change mitigation, by reducing the climate impact of industries which cannot easily stop use of polluting fuel or materials. The IPCC assumes that CCS technologies will have an important role to play in scenarios in which climate change is kept to within 2C.
But others argue that CCS and CCUS technologies could have the effect of delaying the transition away from fossil fuels, and that much of the technology is uneconomical and untested at scale. In July 2023, the European Union and 17 countries including Germany, France and New Zealand said that reliance on carbon capture technology should be limited as it is not a substitute for phasing out fossil fuels.
Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e)
Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) is a term used to conceptualise the effect of different greenhouse gases using one single metric. A smaller amount of a gas which contributes more strongly to the greenhouse effect, such as methane, could have a CO2e many times larger than the same quantity of carbon dioxide.
Carbon market
Carbon markets, also known as emissions trading schemes, are agreements through which countries or businesses buy and sell permits to emit carbon dioxide, often known as carbon credits.

Under a carbon trading market, a nation or company that reduces its carbon emissions to below a certain agreed level can sell the leftover emissions ‘allowance’ — in the form of carbon credits — to others that are still polluting beyond these limits. In theory, this provides a financial incentive to reduce emissions.
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and sequestration
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) refers to processes through which carbon dioxide is captured out of the air so that it does not act as a greenhouse gas. When this carbon is stored long-term, this is called carbon sequestration.
Carbon sequestration happens naturally, with biological processes storing huge quantities of carbon dioxide in the soil, the ocean, forests, grasslands and other natural ecosystems. It can also be achieved through human-made processes, via carbon capture and storage technologies.
CDR and carbon sequestration are regarded as essential tools in climate change mitigation. The IPCC states that “CDR is required to limit warming to 1.5C”, especially in “difficult to decarbonise sectors, such as industry, long-distance transportation, and agriculture”. CDR is also a key feature in most national net-zero plans.
Carbon sinks
Carbon sinks are natural and artificial reservoirs that store carbon dioxide. Carbon sinks play a crucial role in regulating the proportion of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Healthy forests, oceans, soil, peatlands and wetlands are all natural carbon sinks. Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies can act as artificial carbon sinks.
#Circular economy
In a circular economy, resources are reused and recycled in a way that minimises waste and maximises resource efficiency. In contrast to a ‘linear economy’ model in which resources are extracted, used and then discarded, a circular economy ensures that used materials are put back into the production chain, creating a closed ‘loop’ of resource use.
CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons)
CFCs (or chlorofluorocarbons) are gases composed of the elements carbon, chlorine and fluorine which have been used in solvents, refrigerants and aerosol sprays. In the 20th century, CFCs were determined to be responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer, a region of the Earth’s atmosphere that traps ultraviolet radiation from the sun, shielding living creatures from its harmful effects.
Use of CFCs has been phased out worldwide as a result of the landmark Montreal Protocol, agreed in 1987.
Climate change
The United Nations defines climate change as long-term shifts in temperatures and weather patterns. Human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation have generated greenhouse gases, which have raised global average temperatures.
The impacts of climate change are immense, including more frequent and intense extreme weather events, rising sea levels, disrupted rainfall patterns, and melting ice in polar and mountain regions.
Climate justice
The impacts of climate change are disproportionately experienced, with many of the countries and communities who have contributed the least to global emissions being the most vulnerable to the consequences, and least able to adapt. The climate justice movement argues that the people, companies and countries that have benefited the most, economically, from carbon-fuelled development have the greatest responsibility to pay for the effects of that growth, and to help those most affected by the impacts of climate change.


Protesters at the COP27 conference in November 2022 urge rich nations to compensate the communities most affected by climate change (Image © Marie Jacquemin / Greenpeace)
Climate refugees
Climate refugees is a term used by some activists and commentators to describe people who are forced to leave their home due to the impacts of climate change, such as flooding or sea level rise.
There is no formal definition of a climate refugee, and the definition of a refugee used by the United Nations — “people who have fled war, violence, conflict or persecution and have crossed an international border to find safety in another country” — would not cover someone who lost their home in a cyclone or to a rising sea.
COP
In the world of climate change, ‘COP’ refers to the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). This annual meeting brings together the 198 members of the convention, first signed in 1992, to discuss global action on climate change.
At climate COPs, country representatives discuss issues such as how to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that cause the planet to warm; adapting to the impacts of climate change; and financial support for developing countries to move away from fossil fuels and become more resilient to the impacts of climate change.
The last COP, COP27, was held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in November 2022. COP28 will be held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, from 30 November to 12 December 2023.
Cryosphere
The term cryosphere refers to the areas of the planet where most of the water is in a frozen form: the polar regions and high mountains. In the Hindu Kush Himalayas, the world’s highest mountain range, frozen water exists in the form of glaciers, ice caps, snow, permafrost, and ice on rivers and lakes.
D
Deforestation
Deforestation is the cutting down of forests by humans, both for timber and to make space for activities like agriculture and mining. A major threat to both biodiversity and our climate, deforestation releases huge quantities of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
Desertification
Desertification is a process of land degradation in which fertile and biodiverse land in dry or semi-dry areas loses its productivity — essentially turning into a desert. This can be driven by human activities like deforestation and overgrazing, as well as the effects of climate change.
E
Ecosystem
An ecosystem is a biological community of living organisms, including animals, plants and microorganisms, together with the physical environment in which they interact with each other such as water and soil. Ecosystems can be huge — like entire forests — and can encompass many smaller ecosystems.
El Niño
El Niño is a climate pattern in which the surface water of the east-central tropical Pacific Ocean warms to significantly above average. This affects rainfall patterns and weather across the world, raising temperatures globally during its duration. El Niño is part of a phenomenon called the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO); the opposite cooler phase is called La Niña. El Niño events do not occur on a regular schedule, but on average appear every two to seven years.
Emissions
Emissions refer to gases and other substances which are released into the atmosphere as a result of human activities such as manufacturing, energy production and transportation. Emission of greenhouse gases like methane and carbon dioxide since the 1800s have led to global warming.
Energy transition
The energy sector has traditionally been heavily reliant on fossil fuels, and this is the primary cause of climate change. A shift from coal, oil and natural gas towards renewable energy sources like solar and wind, which do not result in major carbon emissions, is referred to as the energy transition.
F
Flash floods
Flash floods are intense and sudden floods, triggered by events like heavy rainfall in a short period of time, or the rapid melting of snow or ice. Flash floods can cause serious damage as they can happen with little to no warning, leaving people unable to evacuate or take necessary precautions.

In the Indian Himalayas, 17 major flash floods have occurred since 1986. Scientists say that more intense forest fires are a major reason for a rise in flash floods in the Himalayas over the past 20 years.
Fossil fuels
Fossil fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas, which all formed from the remains of plants and animals that died millions of years ago. They are therefore not renewable in human timespans. The burning of fossil fuels, largely for energy production, releases huge quantities of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and is the single biggest cause of climate change.
G
Glaciers
Glaciers are slowly flowing masses of ice — like frozen rivers — found in the polar regions and in high mountains. They are formed over centuries as snow falls on land and gets compressed into thick masses of ice. Their movement is primarily driven by the force of gravity acting on the weight of the ice itself.
As climate change warms the world, glaciers are now melting faster than they can be replenished by snowfall. The impacts of melting glaciers can be seen in sea levels, water cycles and weather systems far away from the glaciers themselves. Read more about the melting glaciers of the Himalayas here.


Measuring ‘mass balance’ — a key indicator of glacier health — at Yala glacier in Nepal. (Image: ICIMOD Kathmandu / Flickr, CC BY NC)
Global warming
Many use the terms ‘climate change’ and ‘global warming’ interchangeably. But while global warming refers to the increasing surface temperature of the Earth, ‘climate change’ also encompasses other changes in patterns like wind and rainfall. Human activities that have increased the levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are the major drivers of global warming.
Some media outlets prefer the term ‘global heating’ over ‘global warming’, to better reflect the severity of the crisis.
Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOFs)
A Glacial Lake Outburst Flood or GLOF is a sudden release of water from a lake formed by meltwater from a mountain glacier, which is held back by ice or a moraine (rocks and sediment carried along by the glacier). These floods can be prompted by an earthquake, avalanche or the accumulation of too much meltwater. GLOFs are often extremely destructive, and are a growing threat in the Himalayan watershed.
Green energy
Green energy refers to energy that comes from renewable sources like wind or the sun. Unlike fossil fuels, production of green energy does not result in major carbon emissions. There is debate over the extent to which some renewable energy — especially hydropower — can be truly termed ‘green’, given substantial impacts on rivers and related ecosystems.
Green hydrogen and grey hydrogen
Since hydrogen does not exist naturally as a gas in usable quantities, pure hydrogen is produced artificially through methods such as electrolysis — a process that splits water into hydrogen and oxygen. When these processes are powered using clean energy sources such as solar or wind power, this is called green hydrogen. Hydrogen produced using energy from fossil fuels is called grey hydrogen. Read our explainer to find out more.

Greenhouse gas (GHG) and the greenhouse effect
Carbon dioxide, methane, nitrogen oxide, CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs are all referred to as greenhouse gases, because their presence in the atmosphere traps the sun’s heat, warming the air around the Earth like the glass walls and roof of a greenhouse. This is the greenhouse effect.
Human activities like burning fossil fuels are increasing the proportion of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This is strengthening the greenhouse effect, trapping more heat, and causing the Earth to become warmer.
Greenwashing
Greenwashing, a term coined by environmentalist Jay Westerveld in 1986, is a practice in which companies and organisations create an illusion that their products or services are environmentally friendly, when in fact they might actually be damaging to the environment. A company engaging in ‘greenwashing’ may be seeking to exploit customers’ desires to purchase environmentally-friendly products, or to deflect negative public and political pressure over environmentally damaging practices without significantly changing their actions.
H
Habitat fragmentation
Habitat fragmentation occurs when a large area of continuous habitat — such as a forest — is broken up into multiple smaller patches that are isolated from one another. This is a major threat to biodiversity, as many species are unable to survive in smaller patches of habitat. When small populations are isolated from each other, this can also prevent the exchange of genes between unrelated individuals, which is essential for healthy populations in the long term.


With no more than 2200 individuals left in the wild, the dhole or asiatic wild dog is considered ‘endangered’ by the IUCN, which tracks the status of threatened species. The dhole’s habitat is being fragmented by construction for housing, commercial developments and agriculture, according to the IUCN. (Image: Gregoire Dubois / Flickr, CC BY-NC-SA)
Hindu Kush Himalaya
The Hindu Kush Himalaya (or HKH) is a term used to refer to the mountainous region of South and Central Asia which spans both the 800 kilometre long Hindu Kush mountain range (from Afghanistan to Tajikistan), and the Himalayas themselves (from Pakistan to Myanmar).
A 2023 assessment of the Hindu Kush Himalayan region by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) describes vast changes happening in the region due to climate change: glaciers are melting more quickly, snowfall days are dwindling, and permafrost is melting. The impacts on states, societies, and biodiversity in South Asia and beyond will be immense. Read more about the report here.
Hydrocarbons
Hydrocarbons are the fundamental components of fossil fuels such as coal, petroleum and natural gas. Chemically, hydrocarbons are organic compounds composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Burning hydrocarbons for power generation or as fuel in transportation releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, contributing to climate change.
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are chemical compounds that contain hydrogen, chlorine, fluorine, and carbon atoms, which were developed for use in refrigeration, air conditioning, foam-blowing and aerosols. They are potent greenhouse gases, and are being phased out under the Montreal Protocol because they harm the ozone layer.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are gases that are used in air conditioning, refrigeration and other industries, which were introduced to replace CFCs and HCFCs as they do not deplete the ozone layer. However, they are potent greenhouse gases and can contribute significantly to climate change when they are used.
Under the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, agreed in 2016, world governments have agreed to phase down the production and use of HFCs.
I
Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution was a significant period in Europe and North America, beginning in the 18th century, which saw a transition from agrarian economies to those characterised by technological advancements and industrial manufacturing.
Most of the energy used in these new processes was generated using fossil fuels: coal, initially, and then oil and gas. This greatly increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere, marking the start of anthropogenic climate change.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC, is a scientific body created in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme. Its goal is to inform governments about the latest climate science and explain what impacts climate change will likely have on the world in the coming decades.

Currently, the IPCC has 195 member countries and brings together scientists from all over the world who contribute voluntarily to its work. The IPCC doesn’t produce original research. Instead, hundreds of scientists examine the available scientific literature and distil it into comprehensive Assessment Reports. These reports delve into what drives climate change, what its consequences on the ground may be, and how mitigation (limiting climate change) and adaptation can help protect people from the worst impacts.
J
Just transition
Shifting to a low-carbon economy is essential to keep emissions in check and limit climate change. But decarbonising means major changes to industries — like fossil fuels — which employ millions of people.
A ‘just transition’ is one in which the social and economic implications of this change are adequately addressed. This includes ensuring that the rights of workers and the needs of communities are protected, and that support and opportunities are provided for those whose jobs must change.
K
Kigali Amendment
The Montreal Protocol — the global agreement signed in 1987 to protect the ozone layer — was amended in 2016 during a meeting in Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. The Kigali Amendment aims to phase down the production and use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), potent greenhouses gases which are used as substitutes for ozone-depleting substances such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs).
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol was an international agreement, adopted in 1997, that aimed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to address climate change. The agreement came into force in 2005 and was signed by 192 parties (although United States never ratified the treaty). The Kyoto Protocol set binding emission-reduction targets for industrialised countries, based on historical emissions and other circumstances.
In 2015, the Kyoto Protocol was superseded by the Paris Agreement as the main international treaty for coordinating global action against climate change.
L
La Niña
La Niña is the opposite phase of El Niño in the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). During La Niña, cooler-than-average sea temperatures are noted in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific. Like El Niño, it affects patterns of rainfall and atmospheric pressure worldwide.
Loss and damage
The impacts of climate change include more frequent and intense floods, heatwaves, and rising sea levels. In many cases, adapting to these changes is impossible: lives are lost, land rendered infertile, and habitats changed permanently. The social and financial impacts of climate change that cannot be avoided or adapted to are referred to as ‘loss and damage’.

Loss and damage can be economic, such as loss of livelihoods or lower agricultural yields due to unpredictable weather patterns. It can also be non-economic, such as the loss of cultural traditions, indigenous knowledge, and biodiversity — which can be hard to measure.
Who pays for loss and damage resulting from climate change is a key and contentious issue in global negotiations on dealing with climate change.
M
Migration
As climate change leads to rising sea levels and more frequent and intense extreme weather events such as floods, heatwaves and droughts, many people around the world are being driven to leave their homes in search of a better living environment. This is often called climate migration. As temperatures increase and the effects of climate change escalate, climate migration is expected to increase significantly in coming decades.
Mitigation
Actions taken to reduce the proportion of climate change-causing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are referred to as climate change mitigation. Mitigation measures include reducing emissions by shifting to renewable energy sources; capturing and storing emissions from industrial processes; and improving natural carbon sinks like forests and ocean ecosystems.


A woman installs solar panels on a roof in Bhutan (Image: Asian Development Bank / Flickr / CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
Montreal Protocol
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer is an international environmental agreement, signed in 1987, which aims to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the production and use of ozone-depleting substances (ODS), including chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). These chemicals, commonly used in refrigeration and air conditioning, damage the ozone layer which protects life on earth from the dangerous effects of the sun’s radiation.
The Montreal Protocol is often regarded as the world’s most successful international environmental agreement. Studies have estimated that without the treaty, the ozone layer could have collapsed by 2050.
N
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
Under the 2015 Paris Agreement, countries are required to prepare an outline for their efforts to reduce national emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change. These commitments are referred to as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).
NDCs are submitted every five years, and successive NDCs are supposed to be more ambitious than previous ones (the so-called ‘ratchet mechanism’). Combined, these national targets should amount to a coordinated global effort to reduce the severity and impact of climate change.
Natural gas
Natural gas is a fossil fuel used in electricity generation, heating buildings, cooking, and industrial processes. It is mostly composed of methane, along with smaller amounts of other hydrocarbons such as ethane and propane. It is extracted from underground reservoirs through drilling wells.
Compared to coal and oil, natural gas releases lower levels of carbon dioxide and air pollutants when burned. Some have advocated for use of gas a ‘bridge’ or ‘transition fuel’, to help support the process of transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy. But many experts contend that this argument is a red herring, and could impede investment in cheaper and less-polluting renewable energy.
Nature-based solutions
The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) defines nature-based solutions as “actions to protect, manage and restore natural or modified ecosystems, which address societal challenges, effectively and adaptively, providing human wellbeing and biodiversity benefits.”
In a climate context, nature-based solutions could include protection and restoration of ecosystems which act as carbon sinks. Mangrove forests are a good example of how nature-based solutions can help with both climate change mitigation and adaptation: they can shield communities from coastal storms floods, while also storing carbon.
Net zero
Net zero is a state in which total greenhouse gas emissions entering the environment are equal to the carbon being removed from the atmosphere. This is also referred to as climate neutrality. In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change marked 2050 as the deadline by which the world must reach net zero if the Paris Agreement target of limiting global warming to 1.5C is to be possible.
According to a report by Net Zero Tracker, a London-based collaboration of non-profit and research organisations, around 128 countries and territories including the UK, the United States, India and China have set a net-zero target. More than one-third of largest public trading companies in the world have also set net-zero targets. Many governments and companies with net-zero targets have been criticised for their failure to set clear and timely pathways to reaching these targets.
O
Ocean acidification
About 30pc of the carbon dioxide released into the Earth’s atmosphere is absorbed by the ocean. As levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increase, so too does the carbon dioxide in seawater. This changes the chemical composition of the oceans, making seawater more acidic, a process known as ocean acidification.
Ocean acidification can severely affect marine biodiversity, such as by affecting the process through which animals like oysters and other shellfish build their shells. Coral reefs are also seriously threatened by more acid oceans. This in turn could have severe impacts on populations and economics which depend on the ocean as a source of income and diet.
The ozone layer
Ozone is a gas molecule made up of three oxygen atoms. The ozone layer is a part of the Earth’s stratosphere, where 90pc of ozone in the atmosphere is found. This ozone layer is important for life on Earth as it absorbs some of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation.
Research in the 1970s found that the ozone layer was being depleted, with potentially serious risks for life on earth. The gases responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer, including CFCs and HCFCs, are being phased out under the global environmental agreement the Montreal Protocol. Due to the success of this agreement in limiting use of these chemicals, the ozone layer is now on track to recover.
P
Paris Agreement
The Paris Agreement is a landmark international agreement which aims to limit global average temperature rise to “well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels”, and to ‘pursue efforts’ to limit warming to 1.5C. The Agreement was finalised in 2015, and has been signed and ratified by almost every country in the world.
Under the Paris Agreement, countries present plans to reduce emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change (known as Nationally Determined Contributions or NDCs), and are supposed to review these commitments every five years. The agreement also covers provision of financial support to developing countries to deal with the impacts of climate change, and management of global carbon markets.
Particulate matter and PM 2.5
Particulate matter refers to the mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets found in the air. Some particulate matter comes from natural processes, and it is also generated by human activities such as burning fuel and construction.
Some particulate matter can cause significant health problems for people, especially particles that are so small they can penetrate deep into the body when inhaled. Of particular concern are particles with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometres, known as ‘PM 2.5’.
  People exercise near the India Gate amid heavy smog in New Delhi (Image: Kabir Jhangiani / Alamy)  

People exercise near the India Gate amid heavy smog in New Delhi (Image: Kabir Jhangiani / Alamy)
Permafrost
Any ground that stays completely frozen for at least two years straight is called permafrost. Made up of soil, sand, rock and organic material held together by ice, permafrost is found in the polar regions, and also covers around 40pc of the surface area of the Hindu Kush Himalayan region. Climate change is causing the melting of permafrost. If global average temperatures rise to 2C above pre-industrial levels, it is estimated that the extent of permafrost would fall by more than 40pc.
The loss of permafrost would cause dramatic changes to hydrological cycles and ecosystems in polar and mountain areas. Melting permafrost could also result in the release of huge amounts of greenhouses gases, in turn speeding up warming and driving more melting.
Renewable energy
Renewable energy refers to energy produced using sources like wind power, water, solar radiation and the natural warmth of the Earth. Unlike fossil fuels, the production of energy using renewable sources generally does not release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. They are known as renewable because, unlike fossil fuels dug from the ground, they are not a finite resource.
A transition from fossil fuels to renewable sources in production of energy is an essential part of efforts to limit climate change. In 2020, the share of renewable energy in global electricity production reached 29pc.
While hydropower is a form of renewable energy, the building of dams can have significantly negative effects on river systems, their ecology and the lives of people who depend on them. It is therefore not always regarded as an environmentally friendly form of energy production.
Resilience
Climate resilience refers to the ways in which communities are able to cope with the impacts of climate change, including recovering from extreme weather events linked to climate change. Whereas ‘adaptation’ refers to a permanent alteration in a system in response to changes in the climate, resilience suggests a recovery back to ‘normal’ after a climate change-related disaster.
S
Sustainable Development Goals
The Sustainable Development Goals are a set of 17 interconnected goals set by the United Nations in 2015, which are supposed to be achieved by 2030. They provide a detailed framework for addressing the world’s most pressing social, economic, and environmental challenges.
The Sustainable Development Goals most closely linked to climate change include those on ‘affordable and clean energy’, including an increase in percentage of renewable energy worldwide; taking urgent ‘climate action’ to limit the extent and impacts of climate change; and goals to protect life on land and in the oceans.
T
The Third Pole
The region encompassing the Hindu Kush Himalaya mountain range and the Tibetan Plateau is often known as the ‘Third Pole’ because its ice fields contain the largest amount of frozen water outside the polar regions. This region is the source of 10 major river systems that provide irrigation, power and drinking water to nearly 2 billion people — over 24pc of the world’s population.
Tipping point
In the context of climate change, a tipping point is a threshold which, once passed, triggers a major, irreversible and self-perpetuating change in the climate. Researchers have identified 16 such climate tipping points so far, and say that some may even have already been passed, making major shifts such as the collapse of Greenland’s ice cap and the melting of permafrost inevitable.
A key example is the Amazon rainforest in South America, the world’s biggest rainforest and one of the world’s most biodiverse ecosystems. The Amazon has a huge impact on the climate, including by creating rainfall and stabilising temperatures in the region. But close to a fifth of the Amazon rainforest has been cut down or degraded, meaning there are fewer trees to generate the rain the forest relies on. This risks creating a vicious cycle, with reduced rainfall threatening the surviving forest. According to some scientists, a tipping point at which the cycles the forest depends on would collapse will be reached when deforestation reaches 20-25pc. After this, large areas would turn into a grassland within a few decades.
U
Urban Heat Island effect
The Urban Heat Island effects refers to a phenomenon in which the temperature in urban areas is significantly higher than the surrounding region. Causes include artificial surfaces like concrete and roads absorbing heat; the warmth produced during burning of fuel and other human processes; and an absence of vegetation. The urban heat island effect can exacerbate the severity of heatwaves in urban areas.
V
Vulnerability
The impacts of climate change are felt disproportionately by different communities. Vulnerability to climate change differs based on factors such as geographical location, socioeconomic status and social marginalisation.








https://www.dawn.com/news/1776397


Dawn 2
1 million species risk extinction due to humans: draft UN report
PARIS: Up to one million species face extinction due to human influence, according to a draft UN report obtained by AFP that painstakingly catalogues how humanity has undermined the natural resources upon which its very survival depends.
The accelerating loss of clean air, drinkable water, CO2-absorbing forests, pollinating insects, protein-rich fish and storm-blocking mangroves — to name but a few of the dwindling services rendered by Nature — poses no less of a threat than climate change, says the report, set to be unveiled on May 6.
Indeed, biodiversity loss and global warming are closely linked, according to the 44-page Summary for Policy Makers, which distills a 1,800-page UN assessment of scientific literature on the state of Nature.
Delegates from 130 nations meeting in Paris from April 29 will vet the executive summary of the report
Delegates from 130 nations meeting in Paris from April 29 will vet the executive summary line-by-line. Wording may change, but figures lifted from the underlying report cannot be altered.
“We need to recognise that climate change and loss of Nature are equally important, not just for the environment, but as development and economic 










issues as well,” Robert Watson, chair of the UN-mandated body that compiled the report, told AFP, without divulging its findings.
“The way we produce our food and energy is undermining the regulating services that we get from Nature,” he said, adding that only “transformative change” can stem the damage.
Deforestation and agriculture, including livestock production, account for about a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions, and have wreaked havoc on natural ecosystems as well.
'Mass extinction event'
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) report warns of “an imminent rapid acceleration in the global rate of species extinction.”
The pace of loss “is already tens to hundreds of times higher than it has been, on average, over the last 10 million years,” it notes.
“Half-a-million to a million species are projected to be threatened with extinction, many within decades.” Many experts think a so-called “mass extinction event” — only the sixth in the last half-billion years — is already under way.
The most recent event saw the end of the Cretaceous period some 66 million years ago, when a 10-kilometre-wide asteroid strike wiped out most life forms.
Scientists estimate that Earth is today home to some eight million distinct species, a majority of them insects.
A quarter of catalogued animal and plant species are already being crowded, eaten or poisoned out of existence.
The drop in sheer numbers is even more dramatic, with wild mammal biomass — their collective weight — down by 82 per cent.
Humans and livestock account for more than 95 per cent of mammal biomass.
Population growth
“If we’re going to have a sustainable planet that provides services to communities around the world, we need to change this trajectory in the next 10 years, just as we need to do that with climate,” noted WWF chief scientist Rebecca Shaw, formerly a member of the UN scientific bodies for both climate and biodiversity.
The direct causes of species loss, in order of importance, are shrinking habitat and land-use change, hunting for food or illicit trade in body parts, climate change, pollution, and alien species such as rats, mosquitoes and snakes that hitch rides on ships or planes, the report finds.
“There are also two big indirect drivers of biodiversity loss and climate change — the number of people in the world and their growing ability to consume,” said Watson.
Once seen as primarily a future threat to animal and plant life, the disruptive impact of global warming has accelerated.
Shifts in the distribution of species, for example, will likely double if average temperature go up a notch from 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit) to 2C.
So far, the global thermometer has risen 1C compared with mid-19th century levels.
The 2015 Paris Agreement enjoins nations to cap the rise to “well below” 2C. But a landmark UN climate report in October said that would still be enough to boost the intensity and frequency of deadly heatwaves, droughts, floods and storms.




https://www.dawn.com/news/1478046


Dawn 3
Forests, trees as carbon offsets


ECOLOGISTS and environmentalists have, for many decades, advocated for sustainable forms of economic development. The world has been on an expansive yet destructive development path over the last century. While there can be no denying the benefits to humanity of this rapid development and economic expansion — particularly after 1850 and the discovery of oil — environmentalists have been rightly arguing that improving humanity’s living standards need not be at the cost of the planet.
The most glaring manifestation of unsustainable development is the carbon dioxide emissions of nearly 40 billion tonnes a year which countries and companies have been pumping into the atmosphere. These make for cumulative emissions of over 2.5 trillion tonnes from 1850 to 2021. Finally, there now seems to be some hope, as both global policymakers and business leaders are a little more prepared to respond to existential risks associated with carbon dioxide emissions.
There can be no denying that rich people in rich countries have brought the world to the brink of climate disaster. It is the poor people in poor countries who have borne the brunt of their unsustainable development. The rains in Pakistan in 2022 were attributable to climate change. Over a third of the country at one stage was under water, resulting in several hundred casualties and the displacement of millions of poor. Similarly, villagers beneath the glaciers in Pakistan’s north remain at increased risk solely due to anthropocentric reasons. We hear stories of entire villages being decimated by a moving glacier, the risk of which has increased in a warmer world.
Human civilisations have used fossil fuels for over a millennium, starting with coal. Still, the Industrial Revolution and the discovery of oil changed the scenario rapidly. The world temperature, which had been stable for hundreds of years, suddenly started rising with fossil fuel-based economic expansion, creating an existential threat to humanity. There has been a 1.28 degrees Celsius increase in average global temperatures, and scientists have warned that par
ts of the globe, including South Asia, will become unhabitable over the coming few decades. In Pakistan, areas like Mehar and Kachho along the right bank areas of the Indus, which were flooded last year, are already routinely above 50°C in summer.
Led by climate science, policymakers and businesses are responding to the emissions issue.
The good news is the world at last seems to be grappling with the challenge. Led by climate science, policymakers and businesses are responding to the emissions issue. Voters in the democratic world are pressuring their leaders for concrete action. The world is on the path of zero emissions over the next 50 years. OECD members like the US and EU have pledged to be net zero by 2050, China by 2060 and India by 2070. Similarly, businesses are strategising net-zero plans whereby their emissions would be progressively reduced to zero, corresponding to host country pledges.
Global leaders are currently grappling with the question that, even in a net-zero world, trillions of tonnes of greenhouse gases will still be in the atmosphere. There has to be a policy and business case to take these emissions back from the atmosphere and store them in trees or the geological locations where they were taken from.
The world is looking at nature-based solutions. What we learned in primary school is that trees and plants, while growing, absorb carbon dioxide and emit oxygen into the atmosphere. There is a major rush of businesses investing in raising forests which would sequester carbon dioxide and allow investing companies to offset their emissions (or trade them) against forest-based carbon offsets. This new science and economics model places a monetary value on a tree in the form of the carbon stored in it while it is alive and which can be traded as a carbon offset in the international market. The price of a carbon offset can vary — as low as $10 a tonne to over $100, considering the offset’s quality (which is basically documentation and transparency).
The Sindh government has completed one such transaction through Sindh forest department, whereby a carbon offset from a mangrove forest in the Indus delta has been sold to international buyers. This is such a novel approach that some of Pakistan’s generalist policymakers initially thought the companies would cut and remove the forest to take carbon out of it and complete the transaction! The reality is the amount raised, which runs into millions of dollars each year, will ensure more investment in raising forests and for the betterment of local communities. The transacted forest will not only continue to stand and grow but also give more carbon offset revenue for the next 60 years to the government.
Scientists and technologists have also created technology-based options for what is called ‘Direct Air Capture’ or ‘Carbon Capture and Storage. Currently, the world’s largest DAC system has a capacity of only 4,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide (imagine that against emissions of 40bn tonnes) and costs well over $1,000 per tonne. Compared to that, nature-based solutions or forest-based removal costs are just a few dollars a tonne, and it comes with immense biodiversity and community benefits. However, we should not underestimate human ingenuity: technology-based carbon removal costs will eventually come down, as we have seen in the case of computing power and the cost of solar energy.
As public policy, it should not be about technology versus nature-based solutions. The two should reinforce each other. The vast computing power we have today and technologies like satellites can be hugely helpful in afforestation, monitoring and verification mechanisms to sell carbon offsets.
Pakistan’s economy is overwhelmingly dependent on irrigation and raising deep-rooted trees like the Kikar, which removes excess water through higher evapotranspiration rates. The 2022 rains reminded farmers that agriculture cannot be sustainable without forestry in irrigation plains. This crisis has created unique international and local convergence that makes investments in forestry on private farmlands a viable proposition. New business models and an enabling policy are the need of the hour.
The writer is a retired secretary of the forest & wildlife department and ex-chief conservator of forests.
aijazniz@gmail.com
Published in Dawn, June 16th, 2023




https://www.dawn.com/news/1759957/forests-trees-as-carbon-offsets


Dawn 4
Impact of global warming & climate change on Pakistan
Syed Shujaat Hussain Published November 12, 2023


   


In view of the current global environmental turmoil and intermittent El Nino effect culminating into unexpected climate change for which the major developed countries are largely responsible with Pakistan emitting only one per cent carbon into the ozone layer, the developing countries like us are badly suffering. On our part, without active engagement for our environmental sustainability, it has become extremely important to take this seriously for our very survival.
No doubt Paris Agreement and Kyoto Protocol are in place at the policy level but these are of a medium- and- long-term nature and may take up to 50 years to be fully implemented for real effect. Even if these are made mandatory for all the countries, the ozone layer may take another 50 years to repair itself.
Additionally, this global warming and climate change is causing premature melting of ice in the glaciers in the northern mountains resulting in excessive flows of water now and no water after about 30 to 40 years. Drought, heat waves and uncontrolled forest fires at a massive scale, tidal waves, cyclones etc., are yet another phenomenon being observed in Canada, US, Europe, China, Indo-Pak Subcontinent and even Far East to some extent. This is quite alarming and terrifying for the worst effected country like us. The catastrophic effects of snow melt in Antarctica are already being studied by the scientists.
In the meantime, what can we do in Pakistan to mitigate the adverse effects of major disasters like floods, untimely sudden rains with hail storms, cloud bursts which badly damage our crops and property, and also destroy our infrastructure. The clear example is that of vast areas of our most productive land in our province of Sindh which are still under water after heavy rains and floods caused by climate change during last year which also badly effected southern Punjab, and parts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, including Chitral. The people whose lives were very badly affected by these rains and floods were about 3.3 million.
We must, therefore, act now and immediately and cannot afford to wait for the outcome of international agreements and their implementation, otherwise it will be too late. By mobilising our public opinion through print and electronic media, the government will be forced to take practical and concrete steps like construction of large and small dams, dykes to divert and store flood water, raising heights of embankments and bridges for roads, railways, or even their realignments, improvement of cross drainage structures, in most of the worst clearly identified vulnerable areas by aerial and ground surveys, and shifting of villages to higher ground.
To prevent sheet flows and stagnation of flood waters, training works for diverting the flood waters to the existing drainage channels and rivers will be necessary. For all this, to start with, a master plan is needed, to be prepared under the supervision of Planning division of the Pakistan government along with guess estimates and sound designs, by a competent, experienced, and a reliable consulting firm. Their execution can be phased out for completion within the next three to five years, depending upon the availability of resources, by various agencies like Wapda, Railways, provincial irrigation departments and National Highway Authority.
We also need to develop new varieties of crops like wheat, cotton, corn, and rice etc., that can grow in standing water, excessive rainfall and drought conditions. These projects will generate more income, reduce unemployment and poverty, the root causes of terrorism, bring about overall prosperity and give a new direction and hope to our people. This model can later be followed by other developing countries after due modifications to suit their own conditions.
To implement all the mega projects beyond our capability and capacity, heavy sustainable and consistent funding will be needed. On our part, we should not only carry out necessary surveys and research with the help of new technologies and know how, and make a modest start through our own affordable budgetary provisions, but also create the interest of foreign aid giving agencies especially the World Bank whose Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) for Pakistan calls attention to need for international support.
According to Martin Raiser of World Bank, “the recent flooding and humanitarian crisis provide a wake-up call for urgent action to prevent further devastation to the people of Pakistan and its economy due to climate change…Accelerated climate actions can protect the economy from shocks and secure more sustainable and inclusive growth in Pakistan.” Whereas the developed world has the economic resilience to absorb these shocks, we have none. The friendly countries like China, US, Saudi Arabia, UAE and Qatar could also be persuaded to become our joint partners in these projects as it is not only their moral duty especially of the developed world who are basically responsible for global warming but will also give them better rate of return on their investments (ROI) by improving our communication and transportation network which will facilitate free trade, and transportation of goods from Central Asian countries, China, Middle East, to the West, and from West to the East and North. For us, it is the most alarming and urgent situation which requires political stability, continuation of policies, good law and order environment and removal of terrorist activities to encourage investments, both local and foreign.
The army could be requested to monitor these projects to prevent misappropriation of funds, quality assurance and their timely completion.
(The writer is a former engineer in- Chief & Founding Rector National University of Sciences & Technology (NUST)




https://www.dawn.com/news/1788533




Tribune 1
Why Mother Earth Day 2023 matters more than ever
Climate change is a real and pressing threat that has already begun to impact our world
________________


Murk LarikMay 07, 2023
 facebook twitter whatsup linkded email


Why Mother Earth Day 2023 matters more than ever
________________


 print-news 

The state of our planet has never been more pressing, with climate change posing a real and immediate threat to our environment. As we acknowledged the World Mother Earth Day 2023, it is important that we reflect on the urgency of investing in our planet for the future. The need to reduce carbon emissions, protect natural habitats and promote sustainable practices has never been more critical. By taking action now, we can ensure that we leave a healthy and sustainable world for future generations and avoid the worst impacts of climate change. Investing in our planet is more important now than ever before. Climate change is a real and pressing threat that has already begun to impact our world. Rising temperatures, melting glaciers and extreme weather events are just some of the consequences of a changing climate that we are already experiencing. In order to mitigate these effects and create a more sustainable future, we need to take action now. According to the United Nations, the world needs to reduce carbon emissions by 7.6% every year until 2030 in order to limit the rise in global temperatures to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
This goal is essential to avoid the worst impacts of climate change, including extreme weather events, rising sea levels and food and water scarcity. As former UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon has said, “Climate change does not respect borders; it does not respect who you are — rich and poor, small and big. Therefore, this is what we call ‘global challenges’ which require global solidarity.” We must all work together to address the urgent environmental challenges facing our planet and ensure that we leave a healthy and sustainable world for future generations. One of the most important ways that we can invest in our planet is by reducing our carbon footprint.
Carbon emissions are the primary cause of climate change, and reducing them is essential if we want to slow down the rate of global warming. Renewable energy is one of the most effective ways to reduce our carbon footprint. In 2020, renewable energy accounted for almost 72% of all new power capacity added globally. According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), renewable energy could provide 90% of the world’s electricity by 2050 if the right policies are put in place. Investing in renewable energy is a critical step towards achieving the goal of reducing carbon emissions.
As former US Vice President Al Gore has said, “We’re borrowing money from China to buy oil from the Persian Gulf to burn it in ways that destroy the future of human civilization. Every bit of that has to change.” By investing in renewable energy, we can reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and ensure a more sustainable future. Protecting and restoring natural habitats is another important way to invest in our planet. According to the United Nations, over one million species are currently at risk of extinction due to human activities like deforestation, habitat destruction and climate change.
Protecting and restoring natural habitats can help preserve biodiversity and ensure that future generations can enjoy a healthy and diverse planet. In the words of environmental activist Wangari Maathai, “We need to promote development that does not destroy our environment.” Sustainable agriculture and reducing food waste are important ways to invest in our planet and promote sustainable development.
Agriculture is a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions, but sustainable practices like regenerative agriculture can help sequester carbon and reduce emissions. Reducing food waste is also important, as it can help us conserve resources and reduce emissions from landfills. As Rachel Carson, the author of Silent Spring, said, “In nature, nothing exists alone.” We must recognise that the health of the planet is intricately tied to our own well-being. As we celebrate World Mother Earth Day, let us remember that investing in our planet is not just an ethical responsibility, but also a practical one. The economic and social benefits of a sustainable future far outweigh the costs of inaction.
According to a report by the United Nations Environment Programme, investing just 2% of global GDP in key sectors like energy, water and transport could help us transition to a more sustainable future. This investment could help us create new jobs, reduce poverty and protect the planet for future generations. Protecting and restoring natural habitats is also crucial for the health of the planet. As Jane Goodall, the renowned primatologist, said, “Every individual matters. Every individual has a role to play. Every individual makes a difference.” By taking small actions like reducing our use of single-use plastics, supporting conservation efforts and advocating for stronger environmental policies, we can all make a difference in protecting the planet.
Finally, reducing food waste and promoting sustainable agriculture are important steps towards a more sustainable future. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, approximately one-third of all food produced globally is lost or wasted every year. This not only wastes valuable resources, but also cont.ributes to greenhouse gas emissions. By reducing food waste and promoting sustainable agriculture practices, we can help conserve resources and reduce emissions. In conclusion, investing in our planet is crucial for our future. As we celebrate World Mother Earth Day 2023, let us commit to taking action towards a more sustainable future. By investing in renewable energy, protecting and restoring natural habitats and promoting sustainable agriculture, we can help protect the planet for future generations.






https://tribune.com.pk/story/2415465/why-mother-earth-day-2023-matters-more-than-ever


Tribune 2
How to fix Nature and avoid human misery: UN report
Delegates from 130 nations wrap up week-long negotiations in Paris
________________


AfpMay 04, 2019
 facebook twitter whatsup linkded e
________________
PARIS:




Revamping global food production, retooling the financial sector, moving beyond GDP as a measure of progress and other "transformative changes" are needed to save Nature and ourselves, a major UN biodiversity report is set to conclude.


Delegates from 130 nations wrap up week-long negotiations in Paris Saturday on the executive summary of a 1,800-page tome authored by 400 scientists, the first UN global assessment of the state of Nature -- and its impact on humanity -- in 15 years.




The bombshell Summary for Policymakers, to be unveiled on May 6, makes for very grim reading.


Up to a million of Earth's estimated eight million species face extinction, many of them within decades, according to a draft version obtained by AFP.


All but seven percent of major marine fish stocks are in decline or exploited to the limit of sustainability. At the same time, humanity dumps up to 400 million tonnes of heavy metals, toxic sludge and other waste into oceans and rivers each year.


Since 1990, Earth has lost 2.9 million hectares -- an area more than eight times the size of Germany or Vietnam -- of forests that play a critical role in absorbing record-level CO2 emissions.


The heavily negotiated text does not make explicit policy recommendations, but will serve "as a basis for redefining our objectives" ahead of a key meeting of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity in China next Fall, said Yunne Jai Shin, a researcher at the Research Institute for Development in Marseilles.


But the pressure to set clear targets -- similar to the cap on global warming in the 2015 climate treaty inked in the French capital -- has sparked calls for a "Paris moment" on biodiversity.


'Harmful subsidies'


The new report details how humans are undermining Earth's capacity to produce fresh water, clean air and productive soil, to name a few "ecosystem services".


The direct causes of Nature's degradation -- in order of importance -- are shrinking habitat and land-use change, hunting for food or illicit trade in body parts, climate change, pollution, and predatory or disease-carrying alien species such as rats, mosquitoes and snakes.


"There are also two big indirect drivers of biodiversity loss and climate change -- the number of people in the world and their growing ability to consume," Robert Watson, chair of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), told AFP ahead of the meeting.


The way humanity produces, distributes and consumes food -- accounting for a third of land, 75 percent of fresh water use and a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions -- is especially destructive, the report shows.


Fertiliser use, which degrades the soil's ability to grow plants and absorb CO2, has risen four-fold in just 13 years in Asia, and doubled worldwide since 1990.


"Feeding the world in a sustainable manner entails the transformation of food systems," the report notes.


Local food production, less demand for meat, fewer chemical inputs, use of renewable power, sustainable limits for fisheries, a sharp decline in tropical deforestation -- all are feasible and would help restore Nature.


The report also spotlights "harmful subsidies" that encourage environmentally damaging fishing, agriculture, livestock raising, forestry and mining.


A downward spiral


The report cites estimates that tax havens finance about 70 percent of vessels implicated in unregulated fishing, and an equal share of the soy and beef sectors that are ravaging the Amazon.


The summary for policymakers maps out what Watson calls "several plausible futures," some inviting, others less so.


One labelled "economic optimism" sees burgeoning international trade unfettered by regulation. Population growth slows, but per capita consumption is high, leading to more climate change and pollution.




A "reformed markets" variant would feature more policies aimed at poverty alleviation and protecting the environment, but consumer demand remains high, if more equally distributed.


"Global sustainable development" would see politicians and the public prioritise environmental issues and strict regulations. Policies and education promote low population growth, sustainable production and a concept of progress based on well-being, not just gross domestic product (GDP). People eat a lot less meat, and energy consumption declines.




"All variations of this archetype are beneficial for biodiversity," the underlying report says.


In a kindred world, international institutions weaken, but regional ones pick up the slack toward the same ends.


Finally, the last two scenarios -- "business-as-usual" and "regional competition" -- plunge the planet into a nightmarish, downward spiral of conflict, growing inequality and continuing degradation of Nature.


https://tribune.com.pk/story/1965527/fix-nature-avoid-human-misery-un-report


Tribune 3
Biodiversity is all inclusive of the effects of climate change
Ways to strengthen biodiversity include reducing emission and absorbing carbon
________________
Beenish MahmoodOctober 19, 2023
 facebook twitter whatsup linkded email
The writer holds a Master’s in English Literature and doing M Phil in the same discipline. She can be contacted at beenishmhmd@gmail.com
________________
 print-news Biodiversity is all the different kinds of life you’ll find in one area — for example birds, animals, plants, fungi, etc, and even microorganisms like bacteria that make up our natural world. Nature works in a domino effect. Any break in the chain will lead to destruction. Each species has intrinsic value as propounded by Deep ecologists. To harm any species is a sin against sinning. It will affect the natural and non-natural world simultaneously. For example the bee is dependent on the flower to make honey; the flower is dependent on the soil, air and atmosphere; and the atmosphere is dependent on human intervention. Unnecessary human interference in the realm of nature will only cause chaos. Biodiversity is an essential process that supports all life on earth including humans. The healthy ecosystem provides us with the air we breathe and the food we eat. Biodiversity is biotic and abiotic. Biotic includes all living things whereas abiotic includes non-living things such as air, water, soil, etc.
Examples of biodiversity include habitat change, climate change, overexploitation, pollution, invasive species, etc. The ways to preserve biodiversity include supporting local farms; saving the bees; planting local fruits, flowers and vegetables; respecting local habitats; and knowing the source. And the ways to strengthen biodiversity include reducing emission and absorbing carbon. The solutions to enhance biodiversity and tackle climate change are found within nature.
Current examples of biodiversity include the wildfires in Jakarta putting 10 million children at risk. Another example is of how the Arctic is hit hard by climate change and also how the jellyfish thrive in man-made disruption of the ocean.
Here are a few examples on how to preserve biodiversity. The headline “Victor the eagle’s bird eye view of the Alps raises climate change awareness” reveals how soaring eagle eyes watch melting Alps glacier, thereby warming the earth. Seeing the world as an eagle sees will also convince the viewer of the importance of protecting bird and its environment. Two of humanity’s dreams are to swim with the dolphins and fly with the eagle. How can we convince people to protect birds and their environment if we don’t ever show them what the bird sees. That is why flights are weather dependent. If Victor’s vision is obscured by the clouds, he won’t come!
Climate change is damaging where birds dwell because they are widely known to respond to various forms of perturbations to the climate.
It’s a fact that bird population in major cities of the country is falling rapidly, especially sparrows, according to WWF.
The International Union For Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has declared sparrows on the Red List for extinction. Effects of climate change such as increased temperatures, rising precipitation, advanced spring migration, higher possibility of disease transmission, earlier egg laying time and less food availability is resulting in a decline in the population of sparrows.
India has declared conservation efforts for the sparrows which are Delhi’s state birds!
Birds also play a significant role in the ecosystem and are extremely subjected to human health and welfare such as public hygiene, pest control and the reproduction of plants.
Highly and moderately vulnerable birds may lose more than half of their current range of geographic areas where they live; they are forced to search for suitable habitat and climate conditions elsewhere. The connections between climate change and birds are becoming increasingly clear. Warming temperatures are changing where birds live, the timing of their migration patterns and egg laying, and even the sizes and shapes of their bodies.
To conclude, biodiversity is necessary to maintain a healthy ecological balance. To preserve biodiversity is the answer to all of humanity problems. Habitat modification, ocean acidification, etc are all consequences of climate change. To preserve biodiversity, human interference should be minimized.
Published in The Express Tribune, October 19th, 2023.
https://tribune.com.pk/story/2441755/biodiversity-is-all-inclusive-of-the-effects-of-climate-change


Tribune 4
Deforestation worsens climate change dilemma
.
________________
DNAAugust 23, 2024
 facebook twitter whatsup linkded email
Deforestation worsens climate change dilemma
________________
 print-news ISLAMABAD:
Pakistan, one of the most affected countries by climate change, faces severe challenges due to escalating heatwaves and widespread deforestation.
Although numerous tree plantation campaigns are active across the country, these efforts are insufficient to address the scale of the crisis.
Planting tree is not just a strategy but a crucial tool in managing climate challenges, improving public health, and protecting agriculture and the environment. As highlighted by the Global Climate Risk Index, Pakistan's vulnerability to climate threats underscores the urgent need for intensified and consistent tree plantation initiatives.
According to the Global Forest Watch, Pakistan had 648,000 hectares of tree cover in 2010, accounting for 0.74 per cent of its land area. However, by 2023, the country lost 148 hectares of tree cover, releasing 60.2 kilotons of CO2.
Since 2001, Pakistan has lost 9,940 hectares of tree cover, representing a one per cent decrease since 2,000, and emitted 2.88 million tons of CO2 equivalent.
Deforestation, driven largely by human activities, has been a major issue, with 4.1 per cent of tree cover loss occurring in areas affected by such activities.
In 2024, Pakistan reported 1,534 high-confidence VIIRS fire alerts, a significant increase compared to previous years.
https://tribune.com.pk/story/2490287/deforestation-worsens-climate-change-dilemma


Nation 1
Climate change in Pakistan: An overview
Muhammad Azhad Zulfiqar  August 10, 2020
Regional, Lahore
  
It is a common misconception that climate is actually a different name for weather, but this is far from the truth.
The most profound difference between weather and climate is the duration of their measurement. Climate is measured over a long period of time, usually 30 years. While weather is mostly measured in a considerably shorter period of time, it is measured from day-to-day or year-to-year. The alteration of temperature and standard weather patterns over a long-term is defined as climate change.
Climate change typically affects the predictability of general weather patterns. In essence, climate change can take place both in a specific place and around the globe as a whole.
Due to the increasing climate change and decreased predictability of weather patterns, it has become highly troublesome and difficult to grow crops and practice agriculture for the people of Pakistan.
PM Shehbaz reaffirms commitment to development of KP
Climate change has several causes, most dominant out of which is global warming. Burning fossil fuels, such as coal, natural gas and oil, release huge amounts of carbon dioxide.
Due to human activities in the past decades, the emission of gases such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxides and chlorofluorocarbons have been at a constant and steep rise.
These gases cause a phenomenon called the greenhouse effect which is responsible for the warming of the earth. These gases combined together stop the heat from our atmosphere to leave the earth thus resulting in the warming of the earth.
The probability that human activities have caused the warming of the planet in the last 50 years is more than 95 percent, according to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Pakistan contributes to 1 percent of the total global emissions in the world and has a comparatively low carbon footprint.  We might have less emission levels globally, but we haven’t been successful in controlling our own greenhouse emissions. Moreover, since 1990 our total emissions have increased by 114 percent.
Khawaja Asif questions Bajwa over resettling militants
As a matter of fact, out of Pakistan’s total energy production 61 percent is obtained using fossil fuels. Burning fossil fuels is predominantly the biggest cause of global warming.
In addition, due to the continued ignorance by the Government of Pakistan towards this pressing issue, the levels of carbon dioxide have increased from 68,565 kilotons (kt) almost 166,299 kilotons (kt) in the previous 30 years and this trend is expected to continue.
Another cause of climate change is deforestation. Due to the excessive cutting down of trees the regulation of the amount of carbon dioxide has been disrupted, as trees were responsible for this regulation.
How has climate change impacted Pakistan? The many diverse impacts climate change has on Pakistan range from unpredictability and scarcity of monsoon rainfalls, to the impending melting of the Himalayan Glaciers in the Indus River System and high probability of natural disasters such as floods and drought.
Putin signs decree appointing Alexander Darchiev as Russia’s ambassador to US
Overall high temperatures and low precipitation will most probably lead to difficulties in agriculture and increased food insecurity. Pakistan has faced around 150 weather related incidents as a direct result of climate change, such as floods, smog, forest fires and melting of glaciers, according to experts.
As well as this, almost 2 billion dollars have been spent because of the damages of climate change in the past 20 years. Pakistan has more than 7,000 glaciers up North. They are melting and shrinking at an accelerated rate.
Around 30 glaciers are at a risk of bursting, which may lead to ice avalanches and floods and will directly affect the Indus River System. Furthermore due to increased random and unpredictable natural disasters, for example, floods, there is a huge damage to the already underdeveloped infrastructure in Pakistan.
In view of all the problems caused by climate change it has become a quandary. To solve this particular quandary the Government of Pakistan and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO’s) need to work in a practical and united way.
Lyon coach Paulo Fonseca handed nine-month suspension for confronting referee
The solution to the problem of climate change is to eradicate the use of fossil fuels to meet our energy requirements and use other renewable resources instead.
We need to stop using fossil fuels and use renewable energy, a prime example of which is hydroelectric power. Pakistan has a huge potential for hydroelectric energy and solar energy as well.
Punjab alone gets 3500-3600 sun hours a year. Pakistan as a whole can generate up to an approximate 2.9 million Mega Watts (MW). Another solution is a massive Plantation and Reforestation Programme, in which the Government of Pakistan will plant trees at new locations as well as at locations affected by deforestation.
As such, these trees will regulate carbon dioxide levels and help lower them considerably, resulting in a decrease in global warming. In conclusion, the Government of Pakistan, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO’s) and the people of Pakistan need to work together to make sure the future generations never fear this phenomenon.
Sindh CM approves hiring of 3,500 health workers
Initiative needs to be taken to solve this long lasting problem. When the current generation unites and works in this direction, we will be able to solve this predicament. The aforementioned methods need to be implemented with swiftness, but if not Pakistan will find itself to be in an increasingly perplexed and dire situation.
Muhammad Azhad Zulfiqar
– The author is a student at Aitchison College, Lahore
https://www.nation.com.pk/02-Jan-2023/deforestation-a-major-challenge-to-combat-climate-change


Nation 2
Deforestation: A major challenge to combat climate change
PESHAWAR           -          Smile is back on the face of 70- year old amanullah Khan after his ‘wood taals’ started roaring business in the wake of a significant decline in mercury level during the ongoing harsh cold weather that gripped the Peshawar valley. Busy like a honeybee in cutting timber of native and indigenous species with a big saw in his ‘wood taal’ with the support of five labourers located at Pabbi station on main GT road in Nowshera, amanullah Khan was working against the time to complete orders placed by hundreds of households, tandoors, hotels and marriage halls during the harsh winter. amanullah’s sons were seen helping his father in preparing bundles of endangered Shisham, Phulai, Ber, Kikar, Poplar, Neem, amaltas, Saru and Jaman in his wood taal spread on nearly two acres with trees’ trunks spread everywhere on his business place. “The price of one mound (50kg) of firewood starts from rs600 to rs700 depending on the quality of the timber,” said amanullah, adding that firewood demand increases manifolds in December-January due to shortage of natural gas and high prices of lPG cylinder. “We prefer customers from tandoors, hotels, and marriage halls due to high purchase and profit margin because of wedding season,” he said, adding these timbers were being transported from far-flung areas of Nowshera, Charsadda, Peshawar, and Mardan districts after its purchase from farmers on relatively less price than the government’s timber markets. a visitor can see a large number of cut timbers and even uprooted trunks of trees at wood taals while moving on the main GT road between Tarnab Peshawar to azakhel Nowshera depicting the high rate of deforestation in Pakistan, especially in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. according to National Forest Policy 2015, Pakistan’s total forest-covered area was five percent and the country was losing about 27,000 hectares of forests per year mainly occurring in private and community-owned natural forests. The policy revealed that forest resources in all provinces, especially in KP and Gilgit-Baltistan were under tremendous pressure, particularly in the communal lands, shamalats, guzara, and privately owned forests. It said that deforestation in watershed areas has adversely impacted agriculture yield and quantity of water at outlets besides triggering land degradation, and loss of biodiversity, and wildlife in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. In riparian and coastal areas, especially in Sindh and Balochistan, deforestation amplified floods and facilitated sea water intrusion thus inflicting huge economic losses due to the government kitty as evidenced by the devastating 2010 and 2022 floods. Comparing Pakistan’s deforestation rate with the world, Dr Mumtaz Malik, former Chief Conservator of Wildlife KP said that globally around 10 million hectares of forest were deforested every year - equal to the area of Portugal, adding that around half of this deforestation was counterbalanced by re-growing of forests, which means that an overall around five million hectares of the green gold was lost per year worldwide. “overpopulation, poverty, and unnecessary trees logging was one of the major causes of deforestation in KP,” said Dr Mumtaz Malik, adding in 1947, Pakistan’s population was only 37 million that jumped to a record 223 million in 2022 and if it continued growing with such high pace it is expected to touch 260.3 million in 2030 and 330.8 million by 2050 resulting vanishing of the green gold, wildlife, and bees population. Dr. Mumtaz said that about 68 percent of forests in the country were being used as firewood and 15 percent of trees were being lost due to urbanisation and community-driven demands. he warned, “If we do not change our green sector policies and shift to the adaptation of alternative energy resources including solar, hydroelectric, biomass and wind then there was every possibility of losing the existing forests in next two decades besides witnessing frequent climate change’s disasters.” Dr Mumtaz said deforestation was a national challenge and there was a need to impose a ‘green emergency’ to conserve and protect the green gold by looking above the party politics. he also suggested an agreement between Pakistan and afghanistan to control the smuggling of timber. Wajid ali Khan, former minister for environment and forests, said that thousands of trees planted under the Billions Tree afforestation Project were prematurely cut in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa which was a violation of the agreement signed between the KP forest department and farmers. Gulzar rehman, Conservator Forests, said that under KP Forest ordinance 2002, Forest Force has been raised in KP with powers like the police to protect forest resources and conduct operations against the timber mafia. “The KP forest force was equipped with necessary weaponry, ammunition, vehicles, and a communication system with the power to shoot offenders and timber mafia in self-defence in case of violation of laws.” The forest officers can arrest, detain or take an accused into custody besides checking any vehicle, boat, railway wagon, or pack animal and seize the smuggled timber. Gulzar rehman said that DFos/rFos can enter any depot, wood/saw cutting unit, building, or any premises to search and seize timber and arrest offenders besides holding investigation, inquiry and arrest any offender without any warrant from the magistrate. Gulzar rehman said the forest force’s jurisdiction has been extended to merged areas where check-posts were also established on national and regional highways and roads to curb timber smuggling. he suggested special forest courts for speedy trial of the accused, an increase in lockups, modern wireless systems, and mobility vehicles imperative to curb timber smuggling. Muhammad Ibrahim Khan, Deputy Project Director of the 10 Billion Ttree afforestation Project, said that deforestation was a major reason for climate change, and about 650.17 million saplings were planted till September 30, 2022, in KP under the project to offset its impact. he underscored the need for early operationalisation of the CoP 29 UN fund to help climate change and deforested-induced countries including Pakistan.
https://www.nation.com.pk/02-Jan-2023/deforestation-a-major-challenge-to-combat-climate-change


Nation 3
Pakistan’s Climate Crisis
Pakistan’s climate crisis has not been limited to severe heatwaves and flooding, but also a collapse of flora and fauna.
Sher Ali Bukhari  June 17, 2024
 June 17, 2024
Newspaper, Opinions, Columns
On 27th May 2024, Mohenjo Daro, one of the oldest and largest sites of Indus Valley civilization, experienced a record-breaking temperature of 52.2C, according to a senior officer of the Metrological Department of Pakistan. Not only Mohenjo Daro but also more than 22 cities of Punjab and Sindh have experienced severe forms of heatwaves across the country, which affect everybody from humans to animals.
Pakistan is in the midst of a climate crisis. As per the Global Climate Index, Pakistan has ranked the most fifth vulnerable country in terms of climate change and global warming, despite releasing less than 1pc of Carbon dioxide (CO2). Many international eminent and renowned climate scientists view that Pakistan’s geographical location makes it more vulnerable in terms of climate change. It is now a proven fact that Human activities are responsible for climate crisis and global warming. According to the International Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) sixth assessment report (2023) concluded that 95pc of climate change and global warming are directly outcomes of human activities, such as transportation, industries, deforestation, population expansion, and economic activities. This debunks any kind of propaganda and myth that climate change and global warming are a hoax. Let’s go back to Pakistan again. This country is not strange to climate change and global warming. Pakistan experienced a massive super flood in the year 2022, resulting in the death of 1700 people along with the 33 million population of the country displaced and directly affected by these floods. In addition to that, economic loss was calculated at around $20-30 billion, along with loss of critical infrastructure like schools, hospitals, roads bridges, etc.
PM Shehbaz reaffirms commitment to development of KP
However, Pakistan’s climate crisis has not been limited to severe heatwaves and flooding, but also a collapse of flora and fauna. In environmental science, flora and fauna refer to plant life and animal life respectively. Many reports suggested that Pakistan has lost 60-65pc ecological species due to the effects of climate change that badly affected their natural environment. Take the example of Blind Dolphins that once flourished in the river of the mighty Indus. However, as per reports by WWF, owing to habitat fragmentation and loss, 80pc of blind dolphins on the Indus are being disappeared. This has deepened the crisis of loss of biodiversity in Pakistan.
In addition to that, owing to climate change, Pakistan has experienced rapid melting of glaciers and ice sheets in the northern area of the country. According to a recent finding of Al-Jazeera, Pakistan’s glaciers and ice sheets are at high risk of rapid melting due to severe heatwaves, causing the loss of 60-70pc of glaciers shortly. This would result in frequent occurrences of natural disasters like glacier flooding and put at least 2 million compatriots of this country at high risk. Meanwhile, such a change in glaciers can also change the course of rivers in Pakistan. In this context, as per the latest assessment by the Indus Water River Authority (IWRA), Pakistan’s rivers have experienced a rapid decline in their water volumes and size because of a twin crisis- the first one is of course climate change and the second one is illegal construction of dams by India on western rivers of Pakistan that are transgressed of Indus Water Treaty(1960).
Khawaja Asif questions Bajwa over resettling militants
Now, let’s explore what Pakistan’s governments and individuals can do to tackle the alarming situation of the climate crisis. Regarding the government, first of all, the government should move away from non-renewable energy sources and shift towards renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and biogas energy. The government has already pledged to produce 70pc of energy from renewable energy by 2035, as per the official document of the Climate Change Policy of Pakistan (2022). It also makes another big promise of transition towards electrical vehicles up to 30pc by 2035, lessening greenhouse emissions of C02 in the transportation sector. The government of Pakistan should also come up with green technologies in the field of agriculture to reduce the emission of synthetic fertilizers and chemicals. A step towards sustainable agriculture in Pakistan. The government should also revamp the infrastructure of cities and make them sustainable cities by doing away with the phenomenon of the Urban Island heat effect. Big cities like Karachi, Lahore, and Faisalabad need special attention for a sustainable environment. In these efforts, the government should also protect the flora and fauna of Pakistan by protecting their natural habitats and environment.
Putin signs decree appointing Alexander Darchiev as Russia’s ambassador to US
Pakistan should not shy away from making regional efforts to address the issue of climate change and global warming. Various reports concluded that South Asia has become a hotspot of climate change; therefore, countries like India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh must sit together for the sake of the 2 billion population and environment. In this regard, India should shun the policy of pretty politics at the regional level and let the regional forum -SAARC- be revigorated and revamped for making climate policies at the level of South Asia. Otherwise, blame games upon one another don’t make any tangible and positive results regarding the issue of climate change.
Last but not least, the issue of climate change and global warming can’t be left alone on the shoulders of the government. But individuals can also make sufficient efforts to tackle the climate crisis. For example, individuals can indulge in plantation and forestation drives to make the environment greener and cleaner. Individuals can also perform the duties of consuming less meat, electricity, and personal vehicles for the generation of less waste; usage of sustainable public transportation can be a valuable effort. Lastly, the example of Greta Thunberg and Bill Gates remind us of the importance of climate awareness and campaigns. Therefore, climate awareness campaigns must be initiated from the ground level to the highest level to keep alive the issue of the climate crisis a wise man says that the biggest challenge and threat to humanity in the 21st century is the climate crisis and humanity must address it before it ceases to exist.w
https://www.nation.com.pk/17-Jun-2024/pakistan-s-climate-crisis
Nation 4 
Threats to GB’s Ecosystem
Climate change is a matter of utmost challenge that is a survival risk to mountain commu-nities.
Naveed Akhtar  May 01, 2024
Newspaper, Opinions, Columns
Gilgit-Baltistan is a scenic region that lies in the northernmost part of Pakistan. Gilgit-Baltistan nestles a spectacular natural landscape including three mountain ranges, Glaciers, waterfalls, streams, cold deserts, historical assets, and mesmerizing meadows. The region possesses rich mineral deposits, including precious and semi-precious gemstones, metallic minerals, industrial minerals, and building stones. Gemstones such as ruby, aquamarine, topaz, emerald, and tourmaline have been found in various parts of the region. Additionally, deposits of gold, copper, lead, zinc, limestone, marble, and granite offer immense opportunities for mining operations. Gilgit-Baltistan’s geo-strategic location further heightens its significance as this region is the only gateway to China i.e. Pakistan’s all-weather friend and crucial geo-strategic and defence partner. The region shares its border with Pakistan’s historic arch-rival and prominent economic power in South Asia i.e. India. It lies close to Central Asian countries, which are landlocked countries and rich in natural resources like oil, gas, and other minerals, through land. Gilgit-Baltistan could provide exclusive and easy access for China, and Pakistan to reach Central Asia by land and expand its market to Central Asia.
Sindh CM approves hiring of 3,500 health workers
Beyond all the natural blessings and the region’s geopolitical and economic importance, Gilgit-Baltistan suffers from two basic challenges i.e. changing climate and fundamental constitutional rights. Gilgit-Baltistan’s quest for identity has never-ending sacrifices and struggles that have remained alive for a long to till date. Climate change is a matter of utmost challenge that is a survival risk to mountain communities. The region hosts more than 7000 glaciers and according to a UNDP report, there are around 3,044 new glacier lakes that have been formed as a result of glaciers melting at an unprecedented rate due to human activities contributing to global warming. Flash floods, mudflow, and unprecedented and unusual rain and snow patterns have been devastating for the region’s human, food, water, and community security. Natural great calamities are worsening life in the mountains where due to any natural calamities local communities and their belongings come under devastation. Infrastructure and people-to-people connectivity by land are damaged and disrupted. People living at high altitudes remain disconnected by land as well as by technology as many mountain communities are still forced to live In stone ages with no network, internet or technologies. In 2023 flash floods wreaked havoc across Gilgit-Baltistan, causing damage to standing crops and corn fields, cherry and apricot orchards, damages to irrigation channels or hydropower stations have been also recorded which worsened the already vulnerable communities suffering a lot under poverty, least technological and infrastructure development.
Karachi braces for rising temperatures as heatwave approaches
High floods in various nullahs in Ghizer, Nagar, Hunza, Skardu, Ghanche, and Shigar districts frequently result in total irreparable damages. The region has no financial structure to adopt climate mitigation strategies and work to raise awareness programs locally and as well as nationally to alert stakeholders about the consequences of climate change to the mountain communities. The region budget for FY 2023-24 with a total outlay of over 116 billion rupees, 74 billion rupees have been allocated for non-development expenditures while over 28 billion rupees have been allocated for developmental expenditures. Less than 15% budget for the development budget is a huge concern and a signal that authorities and policymakers are slumbering with no focus on getting the mountain communities out of trouble as a result of climate change triggering flash floods, mudslides and unusual snow and rain patterns challenging local farmers.
Gilgit-Baltistan tourism is now at its peak during spring and summer times when local and international tourists in bulk amount visit the region. Currently, according to a report more than half of the Gilgit-Baltistan population is directly or indirectly dependent upon tourism. With access to regional fruits and dry fruits in national and export markets, the region has been witnessing progress in the living conditions of people, getting employment opportunities in the tourism industry. However, the rise in the tourism industry leaves a region prone to more environmental hazards. Tens of thousands of tourists visit the region which in some way is appealing but at the other end is gradually retarding the ecosystem. Gilgit-Baltistan geo strategic importance is deeply rooted in China’s One Belt One Road initiative aims to connect more than 145 countries’ markets with China via road channels and infrastructure like railways, highways, dry ports etc. In 2013 President of China announced CPEC (China-Pakistan Economic Corridor) valued at $46 billions initially but now it is estimated around $65 Bn. CPEC is welcomed and considered as Game changer for Pakistan’s economy. Gilgit-Baltistan is the only road to link China and Pakistan and hence it is a gateway for CPEC.
Pakistan rejects Indian External Affairs Minister’s remarks on J&K
Also, the region began hosting international flights direct from Dubai in 2023,This year international flight is scheduled from 29th April 2024, with two flights every week between Skardu and Dubai. This is a landmark and historic to further boost the tourism sector of the region and improve livelihood while generating more job opportunities and markets.
Gilgit-Baltistan’s ecosystem is at risk from growing commercial and trade activities between borders. Trade and commercial activities are welcoming but strategies and measures are necessary to cope with the consequences that these trade and commercial activities imprint on the region’s ecosystem. Sustainable Policies and financial structures are necessary to ensure sustainable trade and human activities which is the need of the hour to save generations and ecosystems from further devastations and calamities.
Naveed Akhtar
The writer is a student of International Relations at Quaid i Azam University. He can be reached at naveedakhtar1261@gmail.com
https://www.nation.com.pk/01-May-2024/threats-to-gb-s-ecosystem


Dhaka tribune 1
How climate change impacts Bangladesh’s forests
Climate vulnerability depends not only on climate change, but also on how we develop
Recently, the country experienced several major cyclones (eg Sidr and Aila), indicating that climate change is already impacting Bangladesh, and future effects would further aggravate this already bleak situation.
Although there will be stronger tropical cyclones (TCs) observed in the Bay of Bengal, the total number is not expected to vary much. The stronger TCs will have particularly serious impacts on our nation’s forestry.
The country’s coastal forests, such as mangroves and coastal plantations -- including charland plantations -- will be at the forefront of climate change. Sea rise due to high temperatures may submerge coastal forests and settlements, resulting in climate refugees. In the winter, high evapotranspiration combined with low water flow will increase the salinity of the forest soil and coastal waters.
These conditions adversely affect freshwater-dependent flora and fauna, in particular, and forest productivity and biodiversity in general.
This will eventually shift the character of forest boundaries and vegetation as the species that provide dense canopy cover will be replaced by non-woody shrubs and bushes.   
Climate change projections
Climate change may affect the country’s forest eco-systems, which may result in negative consequences for forest-dependent communities. However, like any other natural systems, forest eco-systems are generally able to tolerate some level of climate change and so will continue to persist in the short term. 
In the long term, whether their resilience will be sufficient enough to tolerate future anthropogenic climate change, is not known.
Using climate change, including adaptation, as a driver to undertake activities with multiple benefits can catalyze progress in achieving a country’s sustainable development goals. Many countries are starting to take action towards adapting to climate change.
Such actions need to be expanded and integrated into national and sectoral planning to ensure that sustainable development and adaptation are mutually enhanced. Climate change-based information has the following advantages on a longer time-scale adaptation planning: 
• Enhancing the scientific basis for decision-making for adaptations
• Strengthening methods and tools for the assessment of adaptation
• Education, training, and public awareness on adaptation, including for young people
• Individual and institutional capacity-building
• Technology development and transfer; and promotion of local coping strategies
• Appropriate legislation and regulatory frameworks, which promote adaptive-friendly action
• An adaptive planning process that covers different time-scales and levels (eg national, regional) and sectors
We have also experienced the impacts of inter-annual time-scale climate variability El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). From our review, we are fairly confident that ENSO variations will continue to occur and influence global climate in the coming decades and centuries. Therefore, climate change projection combined with a future ENSO event may provide improved perspective for capacity-building efforts in the forestry sector of Bangladesh.
Also, future vulnerability depends not only on climate change, but also on development pathways. The implementation of adaptation needs to be integrated into national and international sustainable development priorities, as well as into national and sectoral development plans in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh has already started to take concrete action towards adaptation to climate change. However, such action needs to be expanded and integrated into national and sectoral planning to ensure that sustainable development and adaptation are mutually enhanced.
Recommendations for improvement
Future trends are becoming clear, insofar as there is a need for more quantified spatial specific information, especially on future changes in extremes. This information is needed for improved flood and drought risk analyses. Therefore, we propose a climate change micro-level downscaling analysis of the future climate scenarios for Bangladesh. The output of this downscaling exercise is necessary for future water availability, food security, flood risk analyses, and forest eco-systems.
The other major issue that needs to be seriously addressed is the inter-annual variability ENSO. One of the biggest El Niño related threats is forest fire. Forest fires threaten many ecologically-important areas, including habitats for rare species like tigers, and the smoke they give off is a serious threat to local people’s health. Improved longer-term projection based on El Niño variability is essential for adapting to forest hazards in Bangladesh.
It is also important to improve our understanding of emissions from fires in the region, which would ultimately help improve climate models. It will also contribute to initiatives like the United Nations Collaborative Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation program. 
Md Rashed Chowdhury is the Principal Research Scientist of the Pacific ENSO Applications Climate Center (PEAC), University of Hawaii, USA.
https://www.dhakatribune.com/opinion/op-ed/180147/how-climate-change-impacts-bangladesh%E2%80%99s-forests


Dhaka tribune 2
Study: Half of mangrove ecosystems at risk
* Half of the world's mangrove ecosystems are at risk of collapse from climate change
* Mangroves are crucial for coastal protection, carbon storage, and supporting fisheries
* Urgent conservation and restoration efforts are needed to protect mangroves


Half of the world’s mangrove ecosystems are at risk of collapse due to climate change, deforestation and pollution, according to a study published Wednesday.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), known for its red list of threatened species, has for the first time taken stock of the world’s mangroves, evaluating 36 different regions.
IUCN director general Grethel Aguilar said the assessment “highlights the urgent need for coordinated conservation of mangroves -- crucial habitats for millions in vulnerable communities worldwide.”
Mangroves are trees or shrubs that grow mainly in seawater or brackish water along coastlines and tidal rivers, in equatorial climes. 
Released on the International Day for Biodiversity, IUCN said its findings show that “50% of the mangrove ecosystems assessed are at risk of collapse” -- categorized as either vulnerable, endangered or critically endangered.
According to the assessment, 20% were at severe risk of collapse. 
Mangroves are threatened by deforestation, development, pollution, and dam construction. 
However, the risk is increasing due to sea-level rise and the greater frequency of severe storms associated with climate change. 
Around 15% of the world’s coasts are covered by mangroves, covering about 150,000 square kilometres.
Disastrous disappearance
Climate change threatens a third of mangrove ecosystems assessed, due to rising sea levels. 
According to estimates, at the current rate, a quarter of the global area of mangroves is expected to be submerged in the next 50 years, IUCN said.
The northwest Atlantic Ocean, the northern Indian Ocean, the Red Sea, the South China Sea, and the Gulf of Aden coasts are expected to be particularly severely affected. 
“Mangrove ecosystems are exceptional in their ability to provide essential services to people, including coastal disaster risk reduction, carbon storage and sequestration, and support for fisheries,” said Angela Andrade, chair of the IUCN commission on ecosystem management.
“Their loss stands to be disastrous for nature and people across the globe.” 
The study said looking after mangroves was essential for mitigating the effects of climate change, with healthy ecosystems coping better with sea level rise and providing inland protection from the effects of severe storms. 
Without significant improvement by 2050, climate change and rising sea levels will lead to the loss of 1.8 billion tonnes of carbon stored in mangroves. 
Mangroves currently store nearly 11 billion tons of carbon -- almost three times the amount of carbon stored by tropical forests of the same size.
Maintaining good sediment circulation and allowing mangroves to expand inland will help them cope with sea level rise, IUCN said. It also called for the restoration of mangroves which have already disappeared.
“A very good study of mangrove change globally that was published in 2022 indicates about 5,000 square kilometres of mangrove were lost” between 1996 and 2020, IUCN’s Marco Valderrabano told AFP.


https://www.dhakatribune.com/world/347196/study-half-of-mangrove-ecosystems-at-risk


Dhaka tribune 3
Climate change impacting human health and well-being: How prepared are we?
It is undeniable that Bangladesh will require large funds to protect itself from the wrath of climate change.

This is the fifth part of a series of articles on Politics and Policies of Climate Change, produced by YPF


The growing number of heatwaves, cyclones, and floods which bring forth fresh casualties everyday are all manifestations of the widespread adverse impacts from human induced climate change. Even though the wellbeing of all living things depends on a sustainable ecosystem, global warming is disrupting this system faster than anticipated, and with unequal impacts across geographical regions.
While Bangladesh aims to achieve Universal Health Coverage by 2030, the direct and indirect health hazards related to climate change will make such well-intentioned targets less attainable. Unfortunately, climate driven rise in non-communicable diseases and new pathogens threatens to diminish the accomplishments of years of public health effort in lowering communicable diseases.
As a result, amidst the framework of adaptation and mitigation efforts, an inclusive climate resilient health system that addresses health crises arising from both rapid and slow-onset climatic effects is essential to improve health equity. 
What are the direct and indirect adverse human health impacts from climate change?
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that around 12.6 million people die annually from climate change and environmental pollution.
Bangladesh suffers from high risk when it comes to climate related health hazards, predominantly due to being a climate hotspot and a majority of the population being dependent on the primary sector. A collective study initiated by Amader Gram Cancer Care & Research Center, Bangladesh observed the health and economic challenges in the coastal regions resulting from high salinity of water and soil, driven by the rising sea-level, tidal inundation, floods, and cyclones. Their work also revealed how the consumption of saline water is directly increasing, among other health issues, the prevalence of pathogen induced diarrhea, dysentery, skin-eye infection, and pregnancy complications. An epidemic of hypertension was also detected along with risks of respiratory problems from the moldy indoor environments.
Furthermore, the scarcity of fresh water for drinking, growing crops, raising poultry and fish is threatening food security. Salinity reduces farmland and homestead biodiversity, leading not only to dietary deficiency and malnutrition but it also causes greater rates of migration due to the lack of sustainable livelihood from agriculture. The study also links adaptation strategies of rainwater harvesting in plastic containers to a high incidence of breast cancer in the region. The already worsened conditions are further affected by the direct loss of life from drowning, injury, and displacement within the coastal region. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports that the map of Bangladesh may change from a loss of approximately 11% of its land by 2050, affecting around 15 million people in the coastal region. 
Hence, a looming concern within this century will be food and safe water security. The number of people suffering from hunger increased from 797 million in 2016 to 821 million in 2018. High atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide not only reduce the nutritional quality of wheat, rice, maize, and other crops but a rise of only 1 degree Celsius can drastically reduce the yields as well. Unfortunately, the entire food chain cycle emits a high concentration of all kinds of greenhouse gases (GHGs)which creates a negative feedback mechanism, and in the long-term can have detrimental effect on all recorded health indicators. 
It is not surprising that the findings of such a study is not exclusive to Bangladesh. Heatwaves have been the major weather-related cause of death in the US in the last 30 years. The outdoor workers' productivity and working hours are dwindling due to heat. Exposure to high concentration of particulate matters like ground level ozone and black carbon are affecting respiratory and cardiovascular systems in regions where wildfire and droughts are common. Changes in rainfall variability and high temperature are altering the patterns and distribution of vector-borne diseases like dengue and malaria.
The unpleasant reality remains that the social impacts of climate change pose more risk for the lower-income groups by worsening poverty, inequality, and resource scarcity. While climate change has immense repercussions within the physical world, statistical records also indicate that around one billion people around the globe are living with mental health conditions due to climate deterioration. As issues such as those mentioned above become increasingly intertwined with people's daily lives- depression, anxiety and generally suicidal tendencies could rise to an epidemic level.
Facts which further emphasize the severity of the climate change impact: 
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) recently reported that there is a 98% possibility of global temperatures exceeding the threshold of 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels in the next five years
Globally, the first half of 2022 saw $35 billion of insured losses from natural catastrophes which is 22 percent more than the previous ten-year average
Bangladesh was ranked the seventh most climate-vulnerable country in the world with an alarming record of 185 extreme events and 0.38 fatalities per 100,000 inhabitants in the last two decades
A predicted 1.5°C increase in temperature and annual increase of 74 millimeters of rainfall by 2050 threatens to expose an additional 7.08 million people to significant storm surge damage in coastal regions
As such we are long overdue to implement adaptation and mitigation processes which will curtail and eventually avoid the rising loss and damage from climate changes. 
A question often asked: What is the way forward? 
Globally, health systems are poorly resourced, especially in their capacity to respond to climate sensitivity. The scenario is worse in developing countries where investments in the health sector are even poorer. Although, the Green Climate Fund (GCF) has invested in adaptation projects for cyclone shelters, safe drinking water, improved cooking stove, cooling system, flood, and a combined approach to reduce GHG emissions in Bangladesh, more direct investments in the health service delivery are needed.
Formal documents such as Bangladesh's 8th Five Year Plan and those from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare address the adverse impact of climate change on the health sector. However, most policies, strategies, or plans in both the documents do not either recognize nor do they prioritize specific health issues related to weather or climatic hazards. 
Yet, experts believe that Bangladesh is already leading the way in locally led adaptations. Hundreds of pilot projects combating climate change related issues were successfully deployed by private sector, government agencies, and civil society bodies. To mitigate the onslaught of disasters some of these successful measures can be strategically scaled up. 
As working conditions for tea harvesters resemble that of a live furnace, warnings of imminent heatwaves which will be more frequent and long lasting become quite clear. Countries such the United Kingdom have developed a multi-sectoral approach to address heatwaves, on the other hand China has implemented heat-health warning system. These constructive cases in points may direct Bangladesh to build its very own heat-wave alert system. Afterall it is essential to employ evidence-based protocols to manage heat exhaustion and heat strokes and use affordable options to prevent more heat related mortalities.
Fast-growing and densely populated urban cities, such as Dhaka, especially need faster adaptation actions by the city corporation. From increasing tree cover, parking lot shades, water treatment plants to the use of safe wastewater, green building technologies and cooling materials, the list of mediating actions are endless. Not to mention that a dengue-prone Bangladesh is now in dire need of coordinated disease mapping, early warning systems and vector control systems similar to those of Singapore or the Philippines. 
Rurally, adaptation measures like building houses on stilts or having retention ponds around farms in low land areas can help avoid flood water inundation and reduce displacements. A noteworthy example in this case would be how an NGO, Friendship Bangladesh, had introduced schools in boats and floating hospitals in communities to build climate resilient char areas. 
In fact, in order to induce life-long behavioral changes, awareness programs introduced at school can instill the severity of climate change impacts on young people. This approach could successfully promote climate resilient food habits by encouraging a greater incorporation of plants and whole grains within the daily diet and at the same time, alleviate the development of non-communicable diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and so on. 
At the end of the day, setting up innovative climate technologies to reduce GHGs is the ultimate mitigation process. Transitioning towards renewable energy sources like wind, solar power and hydropower, provided they are sustainable, can further reduce the detrimental effects of climate change. Since adequate food for the masses remain an integral point of concern, drought and salt water resistant crops could be a game changer in ensuring food security. Whereas, the simplicity of embankments and sea walls can provide physical protection against the most notorious floods.
When the question of finances come into play, it is instrumental to remember that an estimated global $1.8 trillion investment in adaptation and mitigation could generate $7.1 trillion through a combination of avoidable costs, and social benefits. 
It is undeniable that Bangladesh will require large funds to protect itself from the wrath of climate change and so the government needs to focus on negotiation processes to persuade major emitters to contribute financially and technologically. Additionally, it has to earnestly explore leveraging the loss and damage fund, address public health hazard in the climate finance space, promote local interventions, and continuously advocate for itself in the global arena for a sustainable future. 
Maliha Mannan Ahmed is an entrepreneur and public health communicator. She is the Founder and Managing Director of Organikare Limited. Jarin Tasneem Oyshi is an Erasmus Mundus Scholar and researcher at Centre for Climate Change and Environmental Research (C3ER), Brac University and Youth Policy Forum (YPF). Her area of expertise includes climate change adaptation, climate finance, environmental sustainability and policy analysis.


https://www.dhakatribune.com/epaper/314790/climate-change-impacting-human-health-and


Dhaka tribune 4
Locked Away
People across the globe are calling for the protection of the planet’s forests, creating hashtags such as #PrayForAmazonas as news of the recent fires were trending on Twitter. While it is true that our forests are an essential resource for carbon sequestration, our world’s peatlands are the less known and often forgotten global carbon sinks. 
Peatlands are terrestrial wetland ecosystems in which the production of organic matter is faster than its decomposition. This process results in the net accumulation of peat - a type of soil with very high organic matter content (often more than 30% by weight) as opposed to mineral soils which have a very low quantity of organic matter.  
Peatlands exist in almost all countries and are a long disregarded ecosystem in the fight against climate change. Peatlands are the most widespread version of wetlands, representing roughly 50 to 70% of the global wetlands. They are invaluable ecosystems as they are the world's largest natural terrestrial carbon store. Worldwide, peatlands only account for around three % of the land surface but may store up to 644 gigatonnes of carbon which represents approximately 21% of the total global soil organic carbon stock. Despite being an essential resource for carbon sequestration, human activities such as artificial drainage for agricultural use, are degrading global peatlands - turning this helpful ecosystem service provider into the opposite - a carbon source, contributing further to climate change!
Peatland types
Temperate and boreal peatlands can be categorized in several ways. One of the most widespread ways to categorize them is - according to the source of water on which these ecosystems depend. The term “Fens” refer to peatlands which rely both on rainfall and groundwater while “Bogs” refer to peatlands which depend solely on rainfall. As a result of the vegetation which grows in such ecosystems, these ecosystems differ from one type to another. However, tropical peatlands lack much attention and have not been studied as well as non-tropical peatlands have been, and as a result, they have not been systematically categorised. As recent as 2017, the world’s largest tropical peatland was discovered in the Congo Basin, meaning large areas that have been storing carbon for millennia may still be undiscovered.   
How do peatlands lock away carbon?
Peatlands are formed in areas where year-round waterlogged conditions exist. This waterlogging slows the natural process of plant decomposition, and the organic matter they are composed of do not fully degrade due to lack of oxygen and “pile-up”, thereby locking away carbon. This process, over millennia, builds up to form layers of peat several metres in depth. Generally, 1 meter of peat takes 1000 years to accumulate.
What other “ecosystem services” do they provide? 
Peatlands provide environmental services of economic and social importance including carbon storage, protection against erosion, biodiversity, nutrient cycling and water management. Peat blankets often protect underlying soils from erosion. Peatlands host a broad diversity of species of plants and animals. Plants provide the structural foundation and are the source of organic compounds derived from photosynthesis, required for the sustenance of animals and microorganisms. Peatlands host plant species of high nature conservation value. Other life forms include an associated diverse range of fungi species, microorganisms, protozoan and algae. Furthermore, peatlands serve as migratory resting grounds for a wide range of bird species. 
Peatlands provide safe drinking water. It is estimated that ten per cent of the planet’s freshwater is stored in peatlands. Highlighting the need for both protecting and maintaining the health of this ecosystem is crucial for water security at present and in the future. Water that is derived from healthy peatlands is generally of high quality - having few pollutants and low nutrient levels, meaning it only requires simple treatment once it reaches a water treatment plant. 
Near-natural peatlands can store large amount of water due to the spongy nature of peat. Heavy rainfall is initially absorbed and gradually released over a period of several days, the peatlands thereby act as a form of natural flood management infrastructure often minimising the risk of flood damage downstream. Coastal peatlands may additionally act as a buffer against salinity intrusion. Thus, peatlands are essential in the management of water catchments and when degraded can exacerbate flooding, which in many areas is likely to increase as climate change impacts increase.
The protection and restoration of previously degraded peatlands can help to address climate change. Degraded peatlands often contribute significantly as a source of greenhouse gas emissions responsible for climate change. A recent estimate of the monetary value of inland peatlands stands at around 11 trillion international dollars. Although peatlands are among the most valuable ecosystems on Earth, little is known about tropical peatlands. However, what we do know is that peat in the tropics occurs mostly in sub-coastal lowlands and forms from rainforest trees and other higher plants, but may also occur in swamp forests. As of 2008, tropical peatlands are estimated to be around 182 million ha, spanning South America, Asia and Africa, and account for almost half of global peatlands. These peatlands store about 40 to 90 gigatonnes of carbon and are becoming more responsive to global climate change and human influences. 
Peatlands in Bangladesh? 
Peatlands can be found in Bangladesh as well, although they are not usually classified as such since other wetland categories are more prominently used in Bangladesh. According to the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) peat occupy around 60,000 ha in Bangladesh, while others have estimated this figure to range from 130,000 ha to 224,700 ha (1.6% of the total area). These peatlands can be found between the Ganges river floodplain and the Ganges tidal floodplain in Gopalgonj, Bagerhat and the adjoining parts of Khulna, Barisal and Jessore districts, in deep depressions in the Sylhet Basin and the Northern and Eastern Hills of Bangladesh.
Peatlands as threatened ecosystems?
Throughout Europe, over the last decades, peatlands throughout Europe and North America have been drained for agricultural use or forestry land reclamation or degraded through peat extraction. In the tropics degradation of peatlands not only caused by agrarian expansion but also result from infrastructure development, such as the construction of roads and highways for better transport networks. Mineral, oil and gas extraction may also cause substantial loss or degradation to peatlands in the tropics. In Bangladesh, peatlands are mostly converted to agricultural land for cultivating Boro rice, shrimp and vegetables where there is little scope for soil carbon storage.  
As peatlands are degraded, they become a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions. For example, in 2015, Indonesian peat swamp forests had seriously damaging fires, that emitted nearly 16 million tonnes of CO2 a day as they burned. This level of emissions contributed more than the daily emissions from the entire US economy. Emissions from drained peatlands are estimated at 1.3 gigatonnes of carbon annually, equivalent to 6% of global anthropogenic CO2 emissions. Peatland restoration can bring significant emission reduction and have been recognized by leading peatland scientists of the world as an effective, comprehensive climate change mitigation strategy.
Conservation and restoration: not one solution for all
Restoration measures of drained and degraded Northern Peatlands usually include rewetting and ditch blocking along with several other methods depending on the level of degradation, vegetation type and peatland type. Many near-natural peatlands are also conserved as protected areas, without much human interference. However, we must acknowledge that what works or has been working for high-income countries may not always work for countries of the global south. Cultural perception and societal priorities differ vastly from one country to another, from one continent to the next, while differences in economic growth, population density, dependence on ecosystems for livelihood further complicates the matter; a “copy and paste” approach, therefore, is not the way forward. What could be a possible way forward though, is for Governments to realize the importance of peatlands, beyond its monetary value and take necessary steps to understand peatlands as not exclusively as ecosystems but as social-ecological systems, thereby acknowledging the importance of humans as part of nature. 
For Bangladesh, the national and local governments must act together with non-governmental organizations (NGOs), as well as relevant research institutes to develop policies to protect and restore peatlands in Bangladesh. Such policies should not only be based on sound “natural” science but should also be based on a sound understanding of local communities. Bangladesh, being an agricultural economy and a country with very high population density, is a country where it is quite challenging to preserve vast areas of peat-forming ecosystems, without incorporating humans into the picture. Several models of community-based management have been tried and tested in the country, especially for wetlands and forests, which could be further developed for peatland management. However, given the lack of research on peatlands in Bangladesh, the first step would be to identify and locate peatlands all over the country, followed by different but inclusive restoration and management measures.   
Under the Paris Agreement countries are encouraged to include peatland restoration in their commitments to global international agreements. The inclusion of peatland emissions from degraded peatlands and on the flip side carbon saving from peatland restoration are both eligible for consideration within Nationally Determined Contributions under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Therefore countries must begin to include peatland restoration and re-wetting in their national climate action plans.
Sate Ahmad is a Research Associate and a PhD Candidate in Peatland Hydrology at the Faculty of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University of Rostock, Germany. He has a background in Applied Ecology and Natural Resource Management, along with research experience in ecosystem services and human well-being in the Bengal Delta and in ecosystem process quantification in German Peatlands. 
Laura Bahlman is completing a masters in International Development, with a background in climate change, policy, and soil ecology research. She is also a visiting researcher at the International Center for Climate Change and Development.


https://www.dhakatribune.com/science-technology-environment/climate-change/193287/locked-away




Daily star 1
A million species risk extinction, are we one of them?
Output Browser Output


                    
Humanity is rapidly destroying the natural world upon which our prosperity -- and ultimately our survival -- depends, according to a landmark UN assessment of the state of Nature released Monday.
Changes wrought by decades of pillaging and poisoning forests, oceans, soil and air threaten society "at least as much as climate change," said Robert Watson, who chaired the 132-nation meeting that validated a Summary for Policymakers forged by 450 experts.
One million animal and plant species face extinction, many within decades, they reported.
Alarmingly, the accelerating pace at which unique life-forms are disappearing -- already tens to hundreds of times faster than during the last ten million years -- could tip Earth into the first mass extinction since non-avian dinosaurs died out 66 million years ago.


In the short term, humans are not at risk, said Josef Settele, a professor at the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research in Germany and co-chair of the UN Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).
"In the longer term, it is hard to say," he told AFP. "If humans do go extinct, Nature will find its way, it always does."
Halting and reversing these dire trends will require "transformative change" -- a sweeping overhaul of the way we produce and consume almost everything, especially food, the report concluded.
"We are eroding the very foundations of our economies, livelihoods, food security, health and quality-of-life worldwide," said Watson.
"By transformative change, we mean a fundamental, system-wide reorganisation."
The pushback from "vested interests," he added, is likely to be fierce.
Drawing from 15,000 sources and an underlying 1,800-page report, the executive summary details how our species' growing footprint and appetites have compromised the natural renewal of resources that sustain civilisation, starting with fresh water, breathable air, and productive soil.
A vicious cycle
An October report from the UN's climate science panel painted a similarly dire picture for global warming, and likewise highlighted the need for social transformation "on an unprecedented scale" to cap the rise in temperature at 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit).
The global thermometer has already gone up by 1C, and on current trends will rise another 3C by century's end.
Climate change and biodiversity loss, it turns out, feed off each other in a vicious cycle.
Deforestation and industrial agriculture are major drivers of species and ecosystem decline, but also account for at least a quarter of man-made greenhouse gas emissions.
Trees release planet-warming carbon dioxide when cut down, and the destruction each year of tropical forests covering an area the size of England shrinks the vegetal sponge that helps to absorb it.
Global warming, in turn, is pushing thousands of animals and plants out of their comfort zones, and intensifies the kind of heatwaves and droughts that recently fuelled unprecedented fires in Australia, Indonesia, Russia, Portugal, California and Greece.
The overlapping drivers of global warming and biodiversity loss point to shared solutions, but there is potential for policy conflict too, the new report cautioned.
Plans to green the global economy reserve a crucial role for burning biofuels and locking away the CO2 released, a technology known as BECCS.
But the huge tracts of land needed to grow energy crops on this scale -- roughly twice the size of India -- would clash with the expansion of protected areas and reforestation efforts, not to mention food production.
For the first time, the UN body has ranked the top five causes of species lost and the degradation of Nature.
Consumer society
By a long shot, the first two are diminished or degraded habitat, and hunting for food or trade -- often illicit -- in body parts.
All but seven percent of major marine fish stocks, for example, are in decline or exploited to the limit of sustainability despite efforts by regional management organisations to fish sustainably.
Global warming is third on the list, but is likely to move up.
"We can see the climate change signal getting stronger really, really quickly," IPBES co-chair Sandra Diaz, a professor at the National University of Cordoba in Argentina, told AFP.
Numbers four and five are pollution -- 400 million tonnes of heavy metals, toxic sludge and other waste are dumped into oceans and rivers each year -- and alien species, such as rats, mosquitoes, snakes and plants that hitch rides on ships or planes.
"There are also two big indirect drivers of biodiversity loss and climate change -- the number of people in the world and their growing ability to consume," said Watson.
The heavily negotiated text does not set benchmarks for progress or "last chance" deadlines for action, as does the 2018 climate report.
Nor is the panel mandated to make explicit policy recommendations.
But it does point unmistakably to actions needed: reduce meat consumption, halt deforestation in tropical countries, discourage luxury consumption, slash perverse subsidies, embrace the concept of a low-growth economy.
The report will "serve as a basis for redefining our objectives" ahead of a key meeting of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity in China in October 2020, said co-author Yunne Jai Shin, a scientist at the Research Institute for Development in Marseilles.
                


https://www.thedailystar.net/environment/wild-life/news/million-species-risk-extinction-are-we-one-them-1739521


Daily star 2
Climate Summit 2021: Pledge renewed to end deforestation by 2030
                    
Afp, Glasgow
Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:00 AM
Last update on: Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:05 AM
Most Viewed
Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:00 AM
Last update on: Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:05 AM
More than 100 countries, including Brazil, endorse multibillion-dollar pledge representing over 85 percent of world’s forests
Afp, Glasgow
Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:00 AM      Last update on: Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:05 AM
World leaders yesterday issued a multibillion-dollar pledge to end deforestation by 2030, a promise met with scepticism by environmental groups who say more urgent action is needed to save the planet's lungs.
According to summit hosts the British government, the pledge is backed by almost $20 billion in public and private funding and is endorsed by more than 100 leaders representing over 85 percent of the world's forests, including the Amazon rainforest, Canada's northern boreal forest and the Congo Basin rainforest.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the agreement on deforestation was pivotal to the overarching goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5 degrees Celsius -- the most ambitious Paris Agreement target.
"Climate change and biodiversity are two sides of the same coin," Johnson said Tuesday.
"We can't deal with the devastating loss of habitat and species without tackling climate change and we can't tackle climate change without protecting our natural environment and respecting the rights of indigenous people."
"So protecting our forests is not only the right course of action to tackle climate change, but the right course for a more prosperous future for us all," he said.
Signatories include Brazil and Russia, which have been singled out for accelerating deforestation in their territories, as well as the United States, China, Australia and France.
The government of Brazil, much criticised for its environmental policies, announced Monday at the summit that it would cut 2005-level greenhouse gas emissions in half by 2030 -- up from a previous pledge of 43 percent.
Environment Minister Joaquim Leite also said Brazil would aim to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.
Brazil also pledged that it would end illegal deforestation by 2028, marking a change of tone after more than two years of soaring destruction under President Jair Bolsonaro.
The summit pledge to "halt and reverse deforestation and land degradation by 2030" encompasses promises to secure the rights of indigenous peoples, and recognise "their role as forest guardians".
While Johnson described the pledge as "unprecedented", a UN climate gathering in New York in 2014 issued a similar declaration to halve the rate of deforestation by 2020, and end it by 2030.
However, trees continue to be cut down on an industrial scale, not least in the Amazon under the far-right government of Bolsonaro.
Deforestation in Brazil surged in 2020, leading to a 9.5-percent increase in its emissions.
Humans have already cut down half of Earth's forests, a practice doubly harmful for the climate when CO2-sucking trees are replaced with livestock or monoculture crops.
Almost a quarter of all man-made emissions of carbon dioxide can be attributed to land use activity such as logging, deforestation and farming.
President Joko Widodo of resource-rich Indonesia said his own archipelago's rainforests, mangroves, seas and peatlands were key to restricting climate change.
"We are committed to protecting these critical carbon sinks and our natural capital for future generations," he said in a statement.
Greenpeace criticised the Glasgow initiative for effectively giving the green light to "another decade of deforestation".
"Indigenous peoples are calling for 80 percent of the Amazon to be protected by 2025, and they're right, that's what's needed," said Greenpeace Brazil executive director Carolina Pasquali.
"The climate and the natural world can't afford this deal," she said.
Many studies have shown that the best way of protecting forests worldwide is to keep them under the management of locals with generations of preservation knowledge.
The commitment comes a day after UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres harangued the gathered leaders to act to save humanity.
"It's time to say: enough," he said.
"Enough of brutalising biodiversity. Enough of killing ourselves with carbon. Enough of burning and drilling and mining our way deeper. We are digging our own graves."
The UN COP26 conference will continue for another two weeks to try to craft national plans to forestall the most devastating impacts of global warming.
Climate Summit 2021: Pledge renewed to end deforestation by 2030
Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:00 AM
Last update on: Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:05 AM
More than 100 countries, including Brazil, endorse multibillion-dollar pledge representing over 85 percent of world’s forests
Afp, Glasgow
Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:00 AM      Last update on: Wed Nov 3, 2021 12:05 AM
World leaders yesterday issued a multibillion-dollar pledge to end deforestation by 2030, a promise met with scepticism by environmental groups who say more urgent action is needed to save the planet's lungs.
According to summit hosts the British government, the pledge is backed by almost $20 billion in public and private funding and is endorsed by more than 100 leaders representing over 85 percent of the world's forests, including the Amazon rainforest, Canada's northern boreal forest and the Congo Basin rainforest.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the agreement on deforestation was pivotal to the overarching goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5 degrees Celsius -- the most ambitious Paris Agreement target.
"Climate change and biodiversity are two sides of the same coin," Johnson said Tuesday.
"We can't deal with the devastating loss of habitat and species without tackling climate change and we can't tackle climate change without protecting our natural environment and respecting the rights of indigenous people."
"So protecting our forests is not only the right course of action to tackle climate change, but the right course for a more prosperous future for us all," he said.
Signatories include Brazil and Russia, which have been singled out for accelerating deforestation in their territories, as well as the United States, China, Australia and France.
The government of Brazil, much criticised for its environmental policies, announced Monday at the summit that it would cut 2005-level greenhouse gas emissions in half by 2030 -- up from a previous pledge of 43 percent.
Environment Minister Joaquim Leite also said Brazil would aim to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.
Brazil also pledged that it would end illegal deforestation by 2028, marking a change of tone after more than two years of soaring destruction under President Jair Bolsonaro.
The summit pledge to "halt and reverse deforestation and land degradation by 2030" encompasses promises to secure the rights of indigenous peoples, and recognise "their role as forest guardians".
While Johnson described the pledge as "unprecedented", a UN climate gathering in New York in 2014 issued a similar declaration to halve the rate of deforestation by 2020, and end it by 2030.
However, trees continue to be cut down on an industrial scale, not least in the Amazon under the far-right government of Bolsonaro.
Deforestation in Brazil surged in 2020, leading to a 9.5-percent increase in its emissions.
Humans have already cut down half of Earth's forests, a practice doubly harmful for the climate when CO2-sucking trees are replaced with livestock or monoculture crops.
Almost a quarter of all man-made emissions of carbon dioxide can be attributed to land use activity such as logging, deforestation and farming.
President Joko Widodo of resource-rich Indonesia said his own archipelago's rainforests, mangroves, seas and peatlands were key to restricting climate change.
"We are committed to protecting these critical carbon sinks and our natural capital for future generations," he said in a statement.
Greenpeace criticised the Glasgow initiative for effectively giving the green light to "another decade of deforestation".
"Indigenous peoples are calling for 80 percent of the Amazon to be protected by 2025, and they're right, that's what's needed," said Greenpeace Brazil executive director Carolina Pasquali.
"The climate and the natural world can't afford this deal," she said.
Many studies have shown that the best way of protecting forests worldwide is to keep them under the management of locals with generations of preservation knowledge.
The commitment comes a day after UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres harangued the gathered leaders to act to save humanity.
"It's time to say: enough," he said.
"Enough of brutalising biodiversity. Enough of killing ourselves with carbon. Enough of burning and drilling and mining our way deeper. We are digging our own graves."
The UN COP26 conference will continue for another two weeks to try to craft national plans to forestall the most devastating impacts of global warming.
                
https://www.thedailystar.net/environment/climate-crisis/climate-action/news/climate-summit-2021-pledge-renewed-end-deforestation-2030-2220641


Daily star 3
Earth suffocated by greenhouse gases                    
IT has been established beyond doubt now that greenhouse gases (GHG) pose serious threat to humans. Even then, it is true that without these gases the world would have been much too cold for comfort, unable to sustain life as we know it.
Many scientists today see the next 100 years as a time of traumatic environmental change. The United Nations Intergovernmental panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projects a rise in average global temperature of about 1 to 3.5 degrees Celsius by 2100. The report further says that this pattern of warming is a cause for concern, if not alarm. Because global temperatures are like bank rates, a small change can make a big difference.
A 1% rise in surface temperature could cause major disruptions in weather patterns that could produce flash floods and unexpected droughts. It could also melt the ice in the Arctic and Antarctica. Such ice melts may cause massive floods as rivers would be unable to cope with the tons of water released. At the same time, declining snow cover over the Himalayas could dramatically change the ecology of the region, causing desertification of the fertile mountain valleys. That could raise sea levels, with catastrophic consequences to island nations. And this pattern of warming -- more in the Arctic than in the equator, more in the night than the day, more in winter than summer -- fits that predicted by the supercomputer models about man-made climate change.
The impact of warming on water bodies is much more severe. IPCC projects that the world's oceans will rise anywhere from 15 to 95 cm by 2100. This may not sound much but figures at the high end of that scale would rob a low lying nation like Bangladesh of over 20% of its arable land. And in the US it could put the cities of New York, New Orleans and Florida Keys under water.
The worst has already started playing out -- seas have risen by 25 cm this century and more thermal expansion of sea water and glacier melting will push it up even further. Even at the low end of the scale mentioned above, rising waters would increase coastal erosion and heighten the damaging effects of hurricanes and coastal storms. Encroaching salt water has the potential to contaminate water supplies that coastal cities and farms depend on. Leaving aside the outright loss of land to the ocean, the threat of contaminated water supplies is perhaps the most serious problem faced by rising sea levels.
Inevitably, the adverse effect of climate change in areas like Bangladesh is grimmer. Research reports made public in the year 2002 indicated that 36,000 sq km in Bangladesh out of 1,47,550 sq km face an uncertain and grim future. This includes the Sundarbans, the biggest mangrove forest in the world, and the longest sea beach in Cox's Bazaar. The stark fact is that about 14,000 sq km in the coastal zone is just one metre above sea level.
Forests, home to two thirds of all species, temper climate and capture and store water. They store 40% of terrestrial carbon and can slow down build up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Deforestation in mountains can worsen floods in grasslands or agricultural land below, as was the case in China and Madagascar and more recently in the hill region of Bangladesh.
Humans have hurt coastal and marine ecosystems directly by draining wetlands, cutting mangroves, trawling oceans for fish and destroying reefs and lagoons. Besides we damage these ecosystems indirectly as rivers transport the effluents and byproducts of agriculture, industry and urban areas to the coasts. Man-made climate change threatens all coastal areas, as melting glaciers send more water seaward and the warming and expanding of the oceans cause sea levels to rise.
This makes it abundantly clear for industrialised and affluent nations to set national or regional limits on the release of carbon dioxide, the chief suspect in global warming. Topping the list of offenders are China and the US, who are least bothered about the disasters this gas has been wreaking on the environment, even if they are not now immune from the catastrophes sweeping through their countries.
The situation, not only in Bangladesh but also around the world, is assuming serious proportions. Much of the world's land is too rocky, arid or salty for agriculture. Forests that have already been cut deserve protection -- they harbour the habitats of earth's endangered wild life. Fewer than two million species of animals, plants and micro-organisms have been identified. Yet tens of millions more may exist in oceans, rainforests and everybody's gardens. In fact, nature does not seek to make a connection with us, nature does not care if we live or die. The hard truth is that we can't survive without the oceans or the forests, for example, but they can do fine without us.
The extinction of forests has come in the wake of unprecedented population boom, especially in the Third World. Much of the land becomes less arable by the minute, assaulted by urbanisation, chemical pollution, desertification and overuse of limited water supplies. The exhaustion of land has created a new class of displaced persons known as "environment migrants." While wars were fought over territory, the future may see "Green Wars" triggered by shortages of such basic resources as topsoil or water.
As a region loses its forests, it also loses its ability to trap and absorb water, and so run-off from the denuded woodland worsens the natural process of soil erosion. The result -- the world wears away 24 billion tons of topsoil a year. When dry areas are worn down by the wind and by intensive farming, the region may eventually become a sterile desert, a fate that has befallen 3% of the world's farm lands.
Now efforts are underway to right some of the wrongs. It is time to put environment or ecosystems at the centre of decision making in government. China, whose factories spew out poisons that fall as acid rain on its neighbours, must cut back on the use of coal and thus reduce sulphur dioxide emissions.
For poor countries as ours, the top priority should be to reduce rapid population growth and urbanisation. Overpopulation means overloading the earth's carrying capacity and that translates into diminishing resources for development and deteriorating quality of life.
In developing countries, which contain more than 80% of the world's 6 billion people, poverty, population growth and environmental damage are closely linked. The damage will accelerate as our population swells. In consequence, social unrest that we are witnessing now will erupt in more vicious form. In a bid to arrest such trends, especially in this age of globalisation and inter-dependence, all our activities have to be linked with sustainable development to create a hybrid concept of user-friendly economic growth
The message from either the Copenhagen or Cancun climate talks has not been very assuring. At the same time "Earth Day" seminars, meetings and rallies in our country, other than being just a slogan, must focus on the progress achieved in respect of providing clean water, protecting forests and reducing pollution.
The Cancun Deal in 2010 set a goal of limiting global warming to 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) but does not identify the stepping stones to achieving this -- and the promises to curb GHG, the toughest issue of all, are only voluntary.
Issues where the Cancun talks could make progress include measures to avert deforestation which accounts for between 12 to 25% of global emissions of GHG. Countries could also give the formal go-ahead to a 'Green Fund' proposed as the main vehicle for providing up to $100 billion a year in aid to poor countries.
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/earth-suffocated-by-greenhouse-gases
                
Daily star 4
Nature-based solutions to our societal challenges                    
As we enter the third year of the Covid-19 pandemic, the societal challenges we were fighting in the pre-Covid times all got worse over the past two years—be it extreme poverty, food and water crises, biodiversity loss, ecological degradation, or climatic change and associated disasters. But, can nature still be a part of tackling these challenges?
When we harness nature to address our problems, we essentially implement nature-based solutions (NbS). While no UN agencies have adopted a universal definition of NbS yet, let's consider the most widely accepted definition suggested by the world's oldest and largest environmental network IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature)—NbS interventions are the "Actions to protect, sustainably manage, and restore natural or modified ecosystems, that address societal challenges effectively and adaptively, simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits."
NbS is separate from our typical rural development work involving natural resource management and pure conservation work. Community development often offers benefits to the human beings through, for example, crop cultivation, fish farming, and livestock rearing. Conservation, on the other hand, works essentially towards protecting certain species or ecosystems. NbS, however, offer both human and biodiversity benefits, not just one. Engaging local people in salt-tolerant rice cultivation in coastal Bangladesh to adapt to climate change, growing one tree species miles after miles as road-side plantation under social forestry, or using bamboo fence (bandal) to protect river bank from wave erosion, for example, are good practices benefiting people. But none is NbS as they don't improve biodiversity directly. On the other hand, protecting the Sundarbans from over-exploitation through participatory models, sustainably managing Moulvibazar's Baikka Beel with the local community, restoring degraded coastal forests with diverse mangrove species by engaging local stakeholders, or creating a new wetland to slow down flood waters from entering an urban area are examples of NbS, as they benefit both people and biodiversity.
Over the last couple of years, NbS has widely been recognised by a wide range of national and global entities. In November 2021, for example, the highly anticipated Glasgow COP26 (Conference of the Parties) on climate change ended by drafting the "Climate Pact". This decision document doesn't use the term Nature-based Solutions or NbS, but has sufficiently incorporated the philosophy and approaches of NbS. Since September 2020, Bangladesh has been hosting the South Asia regional office of the Global Center on Adaptation (GCA). Infrastructure and NbS is one of the seven on-going programmes of the GCA. Recent analyses show that countries, especially the developing ones, identify NbS actions in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) pledges to reduce carbon emissions by 2030. In September 2021, IUCN World Congress held in Marseille, France declared a new Collaborative Certification Scheme to ensure sustainable NbS actions and impacts, which is expected to be introduced in 2022.
While global climate change discourses strongly embrace NbS as a concept, it is a bit different elsewhere. For example, in July 2021, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), a multilateral global entity on biodiversity conservation, launched its first draft of the "Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework". This 12-page document outlines national to global conservation strategies and actions up to 2050, but doesn't recognise NbS per se as a concept or a guiding philosophy.
There are several reasons behind the increasing national and global support to NbS. Once implemented, NbS intervention can give multiple benefits. Let's take conservation of the Sundarbans as an example of NbS. It protects us from cyclones and storm surges, captures carbon from the atmosphere, gives shelter to rich biodiversity, provides us with food, supports local livelihoods, gives space for eco-tourism, and upholds our culture and heritage. Every year, all the mangroves of the world give more than USD 65 billion coastal flood protection. Bangladesh enjoys USD 1.56 billion benefit annually from its mangrove forests. The country is also among the top three, along with India and Vietnam, receiving highest benefits from mangroves by protecting its people.
It is, however, logical to ask if NbS are sufficiently effective as well as cost-effective when compared with typical grey or engineering solutions. Studies show that, to tackle riverine floods, NbS, such as slope revegetation and wetland protection or creation, are more effective than engineering solutions, such as check dams, artificial water storage alternatives, and buffer tanks. From an economic point of view, an analysis of 52 coastal protection projects in the USA showed that, when wave height is low and water depth is high, salt marshes and mangroves are two to five times cheaper than the engineering options.
NbS, however, suffer from some challenges. For example, NbS interventions take time to give us their full benefits. Because of limited evidence of NbS effectiveness and certain misconceptions, we see inadequate policy and political commitments as well as limited funds blocking the scaling up of proven NbS. Conflicts over NbS sites are reported due to land tenure issues. In
absence of effective governance, we see "greenwashing" in the name of NbS depriving the local people from their traditional rights. Unequitable benefit-sharing from new NbS projects can also exacerbate pre-project tension, instability, and conflict situation.
Although NbS offer long-term, multiple benefits and are cost-effective and easier to maintain, it is not that only such ecosystem-based approaches or green solutions can act alone. It is also not that all engineering or grey solutions should be gradually replaced by NbS. Our core development philosophy should be to harness ecosystems' services and processes as much as possible. In many cases, especially in a country like Bangladesh, we need to mix green (biodiversity), grey (engineering), and blue (water) solutions to bring the best out of these three options. A good example of such mix can be seen in Gabura Union of Satkhira which was severely affected by Cyclone Aila back in 2009. In 2014, with Union Parishad and local people, CNRS and IUCN established a mangrove plantation on the chars in front of the polder protecting a part of Gabura. Seven years on, this grey-green combination continues protecting the people and their livelihoods from cyclones and storm surges.
Although the concept NbS was coined recently, Bangladesh has been embracing NbS since long. Floating agriculture, for example, has been a traditional practice in the greater Barishal-Faridpur region for a couple of centuries. We have been creating green belt through coastal afforestation since 1966. We have been practicing community-based sustainable management of wetlands and forests through development projects since the 1990s. In the past decade, our short-term plans (e.g., Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plans), medium-term plans (e.g., Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021-2041, Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Decade 2030), and long-term plans (e.g., Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100) have integrated ecosystem-based approaches into our development pathways. Among these, the Mujib Plan is apparently the first-ever national document that explicitly mentions and extensively adopts NbS as a concept.
A comprehensive analysis of the effectiveness of NbS in Bangladesh, however, was absent until November 2021 when a systematic review was published in a peer-reviewed journal titled Frontiers in Environmental Science. The analysis led by the University of Oxford identifies 19 major NbS interventions implemented in a wide range of ecosystems: coast, inland wetland, terrestrial forest, agroforestry and homestead gardens, cropland, and urban areas. Most extensively studied NbS in Bangladesh are conservation agriculture and protection and restoration of mangroves, terrestrial forests, and wetlands.
It is, however, logical to ask if NbS are sufficiently effective as well as cost-effective when compared with typical grey or engineering solutions. Studies show that, to tackle riverine floods, NbS, such as slope revegetation and wetland protection or creation, are more effective than engineering solutions, such as check dams, artificial water storage alternatives, and buffer tanks. From an economic point of view, an analysis of 52 coastal protection projects in the USA showed that, when wave height is low and water depth is high, salt marshes and mangroves are two to five times cheaper than the engineering options.
NbS, however, suffer from some challenges. For example, NbS interventions take time to give us their full benefits. Because of limited evidence of NbS effectiveness and certain misconceptions, we see inadequate policy and political commitments as well as limited funds blocking the scaling up of proven NbS. Conflicts over NbS sites are reported due to land tenure issues. In
absence of effective governance, we see "greenwashing" in the name of NbS depriving the local people from their traditional rights. Unequitable benefit-sharing from new NbS projects can also exacerbate pre-project tension, instability, and conflict situation.
Although NbS offer long-term, multiple benefits and are cost-effective and easier to maintain, it is not that only such ecosystem-based approaches or green solutions can act alone. It is also not that all engineering or grey solutions should be gradually replaced by NbS. Our core development philosophy should be to harness ecosystems' services and processes as much as possible. In many cases, especially in a country like Bangladesh, we need to mix green (biodiversity), grey (engineering), and blue (water) solutions to bring the best out of these three options. A good example of such mix can be seen in Gabura Union of Satkhira which was severely affected by Cyclone Aila back in 2009. In 2014, with Union Parishad and local people, CNRS and IUCN established a mangrove plantation on the chars in front of the polder protecting a part of Gabura. Seven years on, this grey-green combination continues protecting the people and their livelihoods from cyclones and storm surges.
Although the concept NbS was coined recently, Bangladesh has been embracing NbS since long. Floating agriculture, for example, has been a traditional practice in the greater Barishal-Faridpur region for a couple of centuries. We have been creating green belt through coastal afforestation since 1966. We have been practicing community-based sustainable management of wetlands and forests through development projects since the 1990s. In the past decade, our short-term plans (e.g., Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plans), medium-term plans (e.g., Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021-2041, Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Decade 2030), and long-term plans (e.g., Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100) have integrated ecosystem-based approaches into our development pathways. Among these, the Mujib Plan is apparently the first-ever national document that explicitly mentions and extensively adopts NbS as a concept.
A comprehensive analysis of the effectiveness of NbS in Bangladesh, however, was absent until November 2021 when a systematic review was published in a peer-reviewed journal titled Frontiers in Environmental Science. The analysis led by the University of Oxford identifies 19 major NbS interventions implemented in a wide range of ecosystems: coast, inland wetland, terrestrial forest, agroforestry and homestead gardens, cropland, and urban areas. Most extensively studied NbS in Bangladesh are conservation agriculture and protection and restoration of mangroves, terrestrial forests, and wetlands.
The top five outcomes of these NbS interventions were food production, security and nutrition, biodiversity, climate change mitigation, fishing, and coastal flood protection. This study, however, revealed that many of our development and environmental projects which include NbS interventions remain unrecognised due to a lack of proper documentation. For example, NbS are widely being practiced in the Rohingya refugee camps in Cox's Bazar, but are not sufficiently documented besides in a couple of opinion pieces published in The Daily Star.
As we are understanding NbS better, it is crucial to mainstream NbS into our development actions. I highlight four specific areas for urgent intervention. First, as Bangladesh looks forward to graduating from the Least Developed Country status in the next four years, we should install a mechanism where all our policies are made and practices are improved based upon scientific research and evidence. The present attention to NbS can help us to make such a systemic change. For example, the University of Oxford and the International Centre for Climate Change and Development (ICCCAD) are currently gathering evidence of economic recovery potential of Bangladesh's NbS after a shock, such as economic recession or natural hazard. Such research can guide our post-Covid economic recovery plans and encourage investments in NbS interventions, which can create, restore and retain jobs, diversify livelihoods, improve local productivity, and support social equity.
Second, for effective project formulation and execution, we need to incorporate the principles and standards of NbS in the government's soon-to-be updated Development Project Proforma (DPP). IUCN's Global Standard for NbS could be useful for this. This Standard can guide NbS elements in project design by considering issues, such as scale of the societal challenge to be addressed by an NbS, people's participation in it, its financial feasibility, net biodiversity gains from it, and calculation of trade-offs of the proposed NbS. The Standard can also guide us to adaptively manage the NbS beyond the project tenure and explore its scaling-up opportunities. It should be easier to incorporate NbS Standard in the revised DPP, since the current DPP already appreciates environmental sustainability, biodiversity, ecosystem services, and climate change. We also need to update our procurement policies, which often select the options that are the cheapest and give immediate benefits. But we need to change this mindset. We have to be ambitious keeping in mind long-term benefits, not focusing only on short-term gains.
Third, unlike climate finance, we rarely talk about conservation finance. Every year Bangladesh's Finance Division prepares a climate budget. In the current fiscal year (2021-2022), our climate budget is about USD 3 billion, which is 4.16 percent of our national budget and 0.73 percent of our GDP. We can start a national dialogue by identifying how much of our annual climate budget is spent on NbS. Bangladesh can also lead the way in conservation finance by establishing the "Biodiversity Conservation Fund" already provisioned under the Article 36 of the Bangladesh Biodiversity Act, 2017. Our experience of creating and managing the Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund (BCCTF) could be an added advantage. We may also bring in finance from the private sector or introduce "blue bond" for marine biodiversity conservation, as proposed in the Mujib Plan. But, we must be careful about "greenwashing" in the name of NbS.
Finally, climate change is no longer a challenge to be faced by the people living on earth today. It is a transgenerational crisis that will continue affecting generations to come. Our youths are at the forefront to make the world leadership recognise that reality. Similarly, over the last 50 years, we have destroyed our natural ecosystems so much that one in every eight species of this planet will be extinct over the next few decades. To tackle these two interconnected transgenerational crises, we need transgenerational actions. And, NbS can offer that. An NbS project may end in three years, a human generation may complete its cycle in 30 years, but a protected forest, a restore wetland, a sustainably managed coast are timeless. We, therefore, should engage our youths in NbS conversations and actions.
Dr Haseeb Md Irfanullah
is an independent consultant working on environment, climate change, and research systems. His Twitter handle is @hmirfanullah
                


https://images.thedailystar.net/recovering-covid-reinventing-our-future/developing-inclusive-and-democratic-bangladesh/news/nature-based-solutions-our-societal-challenges-2965636




Prothamlo 1
Scientists detail how deforestation drives climate change


     
Deforestation at Tangail's Madhupur forest.
File Photo
According to a new study by scientists from the University of California, protecting tropical forests can yield climate benefits that enhance carbon storage in nearby areas.
The study was published in the journal, ‘Nature Communications’.
Scientists used climate models, satellite data and computer simulations to mimic the planet’s climate as it exists today and how it may exist in the future as humanity keeps emitting greenhouse gases.
Such models rely on accurate measurements of all the moving parts of the climate system, from how much sunlight hits and warm the climate, to the response of forest biomass to changes in temperature, rainfall and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.
The list of moving parts is long, and one part that has until now remained unmeasured is the degree to which deforestation in tropical rainforests like the Amazon and the Congo contributes to additional forest losses because of its effect on regional climate.
“We used Earth system models to quantify what the climate impact from tropical deforestation is today,” said lead author Yue Li, UCI postdoctoral researcher in Earth system science.
“Then, we used this information with satellite observations of forest biomass to figure out how nearby forests are responding to these changes,” he added.
Jim Randerson, UCI professor of Earth system science, added, “This paper shows that avoiding deforestation yields carbon benefits in nearby regions as a consequence of climate feedbacks.”
He explained that for a new patch of deforestation in the Amazon, the regional climate changes that happened, as a result, led to an additional 5.1 per cent more loss of total biomass in the entire Amazon basin. In the Congo, the additional biomass loss from the climate effects of deforestation is about 3.8 per cent.
Tropical forests store about 200 petagrams of carbon in their aboveground biomass. Since 2010, deforestation has been removing about 1 petagram of that carbon every year. (One pentagram is equal to 1 trillion kilograms.) Until now, climate modellers have, for lack of data, not considered tree mortality in their climate simulations.
But by combining satellite data with climate variables, they obtained information about how sensitive carbon stored in vegetation is to climatic changes that result from tree mortality and fire.
“Deforestation has ramifications to forests growing elsewhere because of its consequences to the region’s air temperature and precipitation,” said co-author Paulo Brando, UCI professor of Earth system science.
“Until recently, it was very difficult to isolate the effects of deforestation though,” he added.
By developing new estimates of regional carbon losses from deforestation-driven climate change in the Amazon and the Congo, the team provided information that will help scientists fine-tune their models. This “might help us design better climate solutions,” Randerson said.
By knowing exactly how much biomass is being lost through this activity, he explained, policymakers can make stronger arguments for why it’s worthwhile to curb deforestation because they can now better describe the knock-on effects.
                






https://en.prothomalo.com/environment/scientists-detail-how-deforestation-drives-climate-change




Prothomalo 2
Nature at risk of 'cascading' species extinction
                    
The carcass of a female Elephant lies decomposing in a shallow pond of caustic.
AFP
Climate change and habitat degradation will cause extinctions that cascade through communities of animals and plants and drive dramatic biodiversity loss, according to new research published on Friday.
The study, in the journal Science Advances, found that chain-reaction extinctions are unavoidable and predicted Earth's ecosystems will see average biodiversity loss of between six and 10 per cent by 2050, depending on different carbon emissions scenarios.
By 2100, losses of animals and plants could rise to as much as 27 per cent, they found in their research that used virtual Earths to map out thousands of food webs.
The authors said their modelling suggested that the biggest changes will come before mid-century, predicting "the bleakest time for natural communities might be imminent and that the next few decades will be decisive for the future of global biodiversity".
With life on Earth under threat from human destruction, overexploitation and pollution, scientists have warned that a million species are facing extinction in what many fear heralds the planet's sixth mass extinction event.
Climate change is expected to dramatically accelerate the losses, with impacts of warming ranging from the effects of extreme weather, to changes in behaviour and habitat.
But authors of the new study said previous modelling has not included estimates for co-extinctions, based on the "cascading effect" of losses on interdependent species.
The researchers in Australia and Europe built hundreds of virtual Earths each populated with more than 33,000 vertebrate species in thousands of food webs across the planet -- "massive computer latticeworks of 'who eats whom'," said co-author Corey Bradshaw, a professor at Flinders University.
They then simulated different climate change scenarios and projections of habitat degradation -- like deforestation -- to predict local biodiversity loss, the proportion of animals lost in a given area.
Life support
The virtual worlds allowed researchers to watch as species moved around and adapted to new environmental conditions and the implications of individual extinctions across food webs.
They found that climate change would be responsible for the greatest proportion of extinction events.
"If you look out your window in 87 years, on average you'll see nearly 30 percent fewer animal species than you do today based on the business-as-usual climate scenario," Bradshaw told AFP.
The study found the greatest threat was in places with the greatest biodiversity -- 36 highly-vulnerable areas containing the most unique species.
"This is because the erosion of species-rich food webs makes biological communities more susceptible to future shocks," said Bradshaw, adding it was "a case of the rich losing their riches the fastest."
The research comes as a UN summit in Montreal attempts to seal a historic "peace pact with nature" and end the rampant destruction.
Global efforts to curb global warming have often eclipsed efforts to tackle the devastation being wrought on nature, but experts have increasingly warned that the two crises are inextricably linked.
"In many ways, biodiversity loss from climate change is far more serious than what climate change will do to human societies, because biodiversity is the very fabric of the Earth's life-support system that makes our lives possible," said Bradshaw.
"The imperative of massive and rapid emissions-reduction policies is made much more urgent knowing this."
                


https://en.prothomalo.com/environment/nbn2iob4r2


Prothomalo 3


Humanity deep in the danger zone of planetary boundaries: Study
                    
Six of nine planetary boundaries -- climate change, deforestation, biodiversity loss, synthetic chemicals including plastics, freshwater depletion, and nitrogen use -- are already deep in the red zone, an international team of 29 scientists reported
The study found that the world's lakes were shrinking, with warming temperatures and human activity seen as the main causes
Deutsche Welle
Human activity and appetites have weakened Earth's resilience, pushing it far beyond the "safe operating space" that keeps the world liveable for most species, including our own, a landmark study said Wednesday.
Six of nine planetary boundaries -- climate change, deforestation, biodiversity loss, synthetic chemicals including plastics, freshwater depletion, and nitrogen use -- are already deep in the red zone, an international team of 29 scientists reported.
Two of the remaining three -- ocean acidification along with the concentration of particle pollution and dust in the atmosphere -- are borderline, with only ozone depletion comfortably within safe bounds.
The planetary boundaries identify "the important processes that keep the Earth within the kind of the living conditions that prevailed over the last 10,000 years, the period when humanity and modern civilisation developed", said lead author Katherine Richardson, a professor at the University of Copenhagen's Globe Institute.
The study is the second major update of the concept, first unveiled in 2009 when only global warming, extinction rates, and nitrogen had transgressed their limits.
"We are still moving in the wrong direction," said co-author Johan Rockstrom, director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) and a co-creator of the schema.
"And there's no indication that any of the boundaries" -- except the ozone layer, slowly on the mend since the chemicals destroying it were banned -- "have started to bend in the right direction", he told journalists in a briefing.
"This means we are losing resilience, that we are putting the stability of the Earth system at risk."
The study quantifies boundaries for all nine interlocking facets of the Earth system.
Headed for disaster
For biodiversity, for example, if the rate at which species disappear is less than 10 times the average extinction rate over the last 10 million years, that is deemed acceptable.
In reality, however, extinctions are occurring at least 100 times faster than this so-called background rate, and 10 times faster than the planetary boundary limit.
For climate change, that threshold is keyed to the concentration of atmospheric CO2, which remained very close to 280 parts per million (ppm) for at least 10,000 years prior to the industrial revolution.
That concentration is today 417 ppm, far above the safe boundary of 350 ppm.
"On climate, we're still following a pathway that takes us unequivocally to disaster," said Rockstrom. "We're headed for 2.5C, 2.6C or 2.7C -- a place we haven't seen for the past four million years."
"There's no evidence whatsoever that humans can survive in that environment," he added.
Thousands upon thousands of chemical compounds created by humans -- from micro-plastics and pesticides to nuclear waste and drugs that have leached into the environment -- were quantified for the first time in the new research, and found to exceed safe limits.
Likewise for the depletion of "green" and "blue" water, freshwater coming from soil and plants on the one hand, and from rivers and lakes on the other.
Setting limits
An important finding of the new update is that different boundaries feed off and amplify each other.
The study examines in particular the interaction between increasing CO2 concentration and damage to the biosphere, especially forest loss, and projects temperature increases when one or both increase.
It shows that even if humanity rapidly draws down greenhouse gas emissions, unless destruction of carbon-absorbing forests is halted at the same time rising global temperatures could tip the planet onto a trajectory of additional warming that would be hard to stop.
"Next to climate change, integrity of the biosphere is the second pillar for our planet," said co-author Wolfgang Lucht, head of Earth System Analysis at PIK.
"We are currently destabilising this pillar by taking out too much biomass, destroying too much habitat, deforesting too much land."
All the boundaries can be brought back into the safe operating space, the study concluded.
"It's just a question of setting limits for the amount of waste we put into the open environment and the amount of living and non-living raw materials we take out," said Richardson.
Hotly debated at first, the planetary boundaries framework quickly became a pillar of Earth system science, with its influence extending today into the realm of policy and even business.               
https://en.prothomalo.com/environment/bkx3mk0ehn


Prothomalo 4
Scientists detail how deforestation drives climate change
              
Deforestation at Tangail's Madhupur forest.


According to a new study by scientists from the University of California, protecting tropical forests can yield climate benefits that enhance carbon storage in nearby areas.
The study was published in the journal, ‘Nature Communications’.
Scientists used climate models, satellite data and computer simulations to mimic the planet’s climate as it exists today and how it may exist in the future as humanity keeps emitting greenhouse gases.
Such models rely on accurate measurements of all the moving parts of the climate system, from how much sunlight hits and warm the climate, to the response of forest biomass to changes in temperature, rainfall and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.
The list of moving parts is long, and one part that has until now remained unmeasured is the degree to which deforestation in tropical rainforests like the Amazon and the Congo contributes to additional forest losses because of its effect on regional climate.
“We used Earth system models to quantify what the climate impact from tropical deforestation is today,” said lead author Yue Li, UCI postdoctoral researcher in Earth system science.
“Then, we used this information with satellite observations of forest biomass to figure out how nearby forests are responding to these changes,” he added.
Jim Randerson, UCI professor of Earth system science, added, “This paper shows that avoiding deforestation yields carbon benefits in nearby regions as a consequence of climate feedbacks.”
He explained that for a new patch of deforestation in the Amazon, the regional climate changes that happened, as a result, led to an additional 5.1 per cent more loss of total biomass in the entire Amazon basin. In the Congo, the additional biomass loss from the climate effects of deforestation is about 3.8 per cent.
Tropical forests store about 200 petagrams of carbon in their aboveground biomass. Since 2010, deforestation has been removing about 1 petagram of that carbon every year. (One pentagram is equal to 1 trillion kilograms.) Until now, climate modellers have, for lack of data, not considered tree mortality in their climate simulations.
But by combining satellite data with climate variables, they obtained information about how sensitive carbon stored in vegetation is to climatic changes that result from tree mortality and fire.
“Deforestation has ramifications to forests growing elsewhere because of its consequences to the region’s air temperature and precipitation,” said co-author Paulo Brando, UCI professor of Earth system science.
“Until recently, it was very difficult to isolate the effects of deforestation though,” he added.
By developing new estimates of regional carbon losses from deforestation-driven climate change in the Amazon and the Congo, the team provided information that will help scientists fine-tune their models. This “might help us design better climate solutions,” Randerson said.
By knowing exactly how much biomass is being lost through this activity, he explained, policymakers can make stronger arguments for why it’s worthwhile to curb deforestation because they can now better describe the knock-on effects.
                


https://en.prothomalo.com/environment/scientists-detail-how-deforestation-drives-climate-change


Hindustan times 1
Million species at risk of wipeout: Draft UN study                    
Hindustan Times, Paris | Agence France-Presse
Apr 24, 2019 02:12 AM IST
Indeed, biodiversity loss and global warming are closely linked, according to the 44-page Summary for Policy Makers, which distills a 1,800-page UN assessment of scientific literature on the state of nature.
Up to one million species face extinction due to human influence, according to a draft UN report obtained by AFP that painstakingly catalogues how humanity has undermined the natural resources upon which its very survival depends.
Biodiversity loss and global warming are closely linked, according to the 44-page Summary for Policy Makers, which distills a 1,800-page UN assessment of scientific literature on the state of nature.(HT Photo)
The accelerating loss of clean air, drinkable water, CO2-absorbing forests, pollinating insects, protein-rich fish and storm-blocking mangroves — to name but a few of the dwindling services rendered by nature — poses no less of a threat than climate change, says the report, set to be unveiled May 6.
Indeed, biodiversity loss and global warming are closely linked, according to the 44-page Summary for Policy Makers, which distills a 1,800-page UN assessment of scientific literature on the state of nature.
Delegates from 130 nations meeting in Paris from April 29 will vet the executive summary line-by-line.
Wording may change, but figures lifted from the underlying report cannot be altered.
“We need to recognise that climate change and loss of nature are equally important, not just for the environment, but as development and economic issues as well,” Robert Watson, chair of the UN-mandated body that compiled the report, told AFP, without divulging its findings.
“The way we produce our food and energy is undermining the regulating services that we get from Nature,” he said, adding that only “transformative change” can stem the damage.
Deforestation and agriculture, including livestock production, account for about a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions, and have wreaked havoc on natural ecosystems as well.
‘Mass extinction event’
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) report warns of “an imminent rapid acceleration in the global rate of species extinction.”
The pace of loss “is already tens to hundreds of times higher than it has been, on average, over the last 10 million years,” it notes. “Half-a-million to a million species are projected to be threatened with extinction, many within decades.”
Many experts think a so-called “mass extinction event” -- only the sixth in the last half-billion years -- is already under way. The most recent saw the end of the Cretaceous period some 66 million years ago, when a 10-kilometre-wide asteroid strike wiped out most lifeforms.
Scientists estimate that Earth is today home to some eight million distinct species, a majority of them insects.
A quarter of catalogued animal and plant species are already being crowded, eaten or poisoned out of existence.
The drop in sheer numbers is even more dramatic, with wild mammal biomass -- their collective weight -- down by 82 percent.
Humans and livestock account for more than 95% of mammal biomass.
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/million-species-at-risk-of-wipeout-draft-un-study/story-sQVoR17R79PPRtY3Sd4M2N.html
                


 Times of india  1
Eco friendly village to save green cover
KANPUR: At a time when the threat of climate change induced by global warming is looming large over our eco-system, the local environmentalists of Etawah have come up with a noble concept of making villagers aware about the benefits of plantation to save the shrinking green cover.
The forest conservation movement called as 'Green Village' concept, which has been recently acknowledged and forwarded to 196 countries by an international body,  United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change, UNFCCC, is being led by Prabhat Mishra, assistant director, National Savings, Etawah.
Mishra has been motivating villagers to save the forest since past eight years.
"The 'Green Village' concept was developed by me in the year 2005. Under this model, a village is selected and each family from the village is made aware and educated about the disasters of deforestation and benefits of afforestation. At least one member of each family is being asked to do plantation of a plant of at least one specie in his/her surroundings," said Mishra.
In this way, not only the people's participation would be ensured but percentage of green cover area will also be increased, he added.
'Green Village' model is equally helpful in controlling species from getting extinct, desertification and deforestation. This will be helpful in sustainable development, bio-diversity conservation, water conservation, soil conservation and bio-sequestration, informed Mishra. "We are living in a world which is under 'transition and transformation phase' of energy and is facing the problem of climate change. Trees are the 'best natural sinks' of CO2 and will help to tackle the climate change," said he further.
Over the years, deforestation has resulted into major loss of biodiversity. "Man's intervention has speeded up the deforestation rate. An estimated 18 million acres of forest are lost each year according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation," said Rajiv Chauhan, secretary, Society for Conservation of Nature. He is also a part of the 'Green village' campaign.
The causes of deforestation are industrial agriculture, shifting cultivation, urbanization, population growth, desertification, selective destruction and habitat destruction, he added. According to IUCN's Red List, habitat destruction is universally the most dominant threat to biodiversity, he said.
According to  World Bank  data, for the 70% of the world's poor living in rural areas, agriculture is the main source of income and employment. Due to increasing population pressure, villagers are paying more attention on crop cultivation than on afforestation.
This situation will increase deforestation and will disturb Oxygen evolution and Carbon dioxide consumption ratio in the ecosystem; ultimately adding to climate change. It is estimated that about 15% of all greenhouse gas emissions are the result of deforestation. Such practices and activities are not environment friendly and are un-sustainable.
It is the fact that without remedial measures, the current living 'biological life forms' will collapse, Chauhan added. Deforestation can only be checked by applying afforestation strategies through maximum participation of local communities. "One such grass root level strategy can transform the whole village into 'Green Village'," he said further.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/kanpur/eco-friendly-village-to-save-green-cover/articleshow/25782449.cms


Hindustan times 2
What’s the next course?: Mridula Ramesh on the future of sustainable food
What exactly is sustainable eating? Eating is about food, but the term “sustainable” has grown to mean everything and hence nothing. It’s an unaccountable word, a ne’er-do-well accomplice for virtue-signallers and a welcome shield for climate sinners.


To unpack this term, let us explore its origins: “Sustain” comes from the Latin “sustinere”, which is a combination of “sub” (up from below) and “tenere” (or hold). Sustainable therefore refers to something that can keep going.
Over time, shades have been added, and others scrubbed away to arrive at a modern holdall term of all that is good. For the purposes of this exploration, let us define sustainable food as something that keeps us and the planet going without tipping either over the edge. With this definition, let us explore food from the lens of the person, the planet, and what path the food travels from planet to person.
Person
At the level of a person, a sustainable food system ensures no one goes hungry and no one is overweight either. The good news from the most recent National Family Health Survey is that fewer Indians are going hungry. Given that women tend to have last dibs on a family’s food, it is encouraging to see that the percentage of women who are underweight has fallen from about 23% in 2015-16 to under 19% in 2019-21.
Other measures of hunger, such as children who are too short for their age, or too skinny for their height, show similar trends. But averages obscure the way forward. So, while averages are falling, the stark differences between states show us where we need to act. Moreover, the trend for overweight/obesity data is troubling. For the first time in records, more Indian women are overweight than underweight, a dubious distinction and one that shows that our challenge in making food “sustainable” from a human angle has changed from “more food” to “different food, targeted better”.
Let us now turn our attention to our gut biome, the microbial ecosystem in our gut that is now known to affect everything from sleep to emotions, immunity and well-being. Our current diet, high in processed food and pesticides, is doing it no favours.
Would going organic help? Many of the synthetic fertilisers and pesticides used to grow food harm farmers, the planet, us and our microbiome. But they are useful.
For most of human history, crop production rose only when forest or grassland gave way to farms. But over the past few decades, food production has nearly tripled, even though cropland area has risen by a mere 10%. More crop has been squeezed out of every acre of land by using more-productive seeds, six times more fertiliser, more pesticides, more mechanisation. More.
The benefits are immense: spared forests and grasslands, and food security for billions. The cons take the form of depleted soils, a brutal blow on biosphere health, rising greenhouse-gas emissions and an unprecedented emptying of the world’s groundwater reserves. Unsurprisingly, from the comfort of a full stomach, there has been a call to return to simpler times. So, is going organic sustainable?
Sri Lanka’s experience makes us pause. In recent decades, that country had become almost self-sufficient in rice. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)’s data shows that tea exports soared to over $1 billion dollars a year from 2008 on, from about half that in the preceding decade. But in 2018, Sri Lanka slipped into a constitutional crisis, with a change of guard in leadership. On Easter Sunday in 2019, a series of bomb blasts rocked churches and hotels in Colombo. Tourism, a bulwark of the island nation’s economy, floundered and then evaporated altogether with Covid.
In 2021, against the advice of some of its most distinguished agronomists and scientists, the Sri Lankan government banned the import of synthetic fertiliser. Going organic would save hundreds of millions of dollars in foreign exchange in fertiliser import and subsidies, went the thinking. But rice output, as the experts had warned, fell by a fifth, and tea exports, a major source of foreign exchange, plummeted.
Sri Lanka lurched into crisis. Millions slid into poverty, and the lines for food snaking across the country released a rage that toppled the government. But, the confidence of pundits who whispered Sri Lanka down the primrose path to organic nirvana remains unshaken. Look at Cuba, they say.
Cuba depended on imported food and fertiliser in 1990, when suddenly the collapse of the Soviet Union and US embargo cut off fertiliser and food imports almost overnight. Cuba, a country that once provided sugar for the communist world and had proudly eliminated hunger, was soon flirting with starvation.
The country adapted by growing crops in small, urban community gardens, scaling up compost factories, reducing food waste and tightening their belts (there was no democratic government to listen to the people’s woes, and no free press to reveal how tight the belt was pulled).
Deprived of synthetic pesticides, Cuba turned to biological pest control. They bred insects to eat other insects. Slowly, Cuba, thinner but resilient, survived. But fast-forward to today. Cuba still imports much of its food and much of Cuban farmland is not organic.
My conversations with organic food companies and personal experience with organic farms suggests that it takes time, handholding, trial and error to increase yield in organic farming. Can we go half-way? “Natural” farming, which eschews synthetic pesticides, is less verifiable but more resilient than organic farming. But with customers willing to pay a steep premium, greenwashing makes us question whether natural farming is either real or “sustainable”. Moreover, to transition nationally to natural farming needs enormous quantities of cheap, natural fertiliser and pesticides — a daunting ask, to say the least.
The clincher is national security: current organic yields are too low to keep India food-secure. To wit, imagine how the recent fracas with Canada would be playing out if India was dependent on Canadian wheat for its rotis.
So what can we do? To understand the path to success, goes the Chinese proverb, ask those coming back. Cuba’s success with the biological control of pests deserves further study, but Sri Lanka’s experience tells us to be wary of going organic wholescale. Instead, consider that India may spend more than  ₹  1.75 lakh crore on fertiliser subsidies in 2023-24 — a fortune by any reckoning. This can be better targeted, using the under-tapped gold mine of the soil health card scheme. Available data confirms that Indian farms sorely need more organic content, which will not be met by subsidising synthetic fertiliser. Cutting and targeting the subsidy could smoothen the transition to a more sustainable way of growing food. But such moves are stonewalled by the reflexive chorus of “anti-farmer”. Hmmm.
Planet
Concerns of planetary health reinforce the need to eat and grow food differently.
If food production were a country, it would eclipse China as the leading carbon polluter of the planet. Growing and transporting food from farm to our fingers generates roughly a third of humanity’s annual greenhouse-gas emissions. Worse, about a third of food is wasted. Think. How many of us have been outraged by the carbon pollution of a coal plant? Yet all of India’s coal plants — together — emit a sliver of global food waste emissions.
There is also a matter of philosophy. Coal plants, climate-unfriendly as they are, generate steady electricity that a fast-growing economy like India needs. Food waste, which faces far-less-organised outrage, is a worse climate villain, smirking in the shadows as coal takes the heat. India’s food waste alone, depending on which data set one considers, emits far more greenhouse gases than all the coal plants in South India put together. And yet, where is the outrage? The protests? The torrents of virtuously angry words that can beget action?
The rage against coal helped India install hundreds of gigawatts of renewable power. We waste food because we can afford to, underscoring again that India’s food challenge has changed from “more food” to “food targeted better”.
Talking about food emissions brings us to the bovine in the room. Methane is released when ruminant animals (such as buffaloes) belch or pass gas. Methane is a powerful greenhouse gas, about 28 times as potent as carbon dioxide in terms of the warming it can cause over 100 years. But when we shrink our horizon to 20 years, a period more relatable to us, methane becomes 80 times as powerful as CO2.
Our relative indifference to livestock (and rice field) emissions looks a lot less defensible in this shorter horizon. Of course, reducing emissions is only one consideration in the trade-offs we must negotiate while looking at livestock. Dairy products and eggs provide cold, hard daily cash to the rural economy in a way nothing else does (although MGNREGA and the PM-Kisan scheme are beginning to address this). Livestock also provide income when crops fail (crop insurance could help). Can we club these schemes into a Kamadhenu bucket, providing all the financial benefits of livestock (cash, counter-cyclical income) without the emissions? Worth considering.
Livestock has transformed global biodiversity. Humans and farmed animals now account for 96% of the weight of all mammals. Sometimes, I wonder if we realise that we are waltzing along a precipice.
Humans are part of the whole, and the whole is being ravaged. According to the United Nations Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, extinction rates today are tens to hundreds of times higher than the average during the past 10 million years, and the pace is accelerating. And yet, we continue on this road.
Take the Amazon. Brazilian agriculture is the child of deforestation. Soy cultivation (most of which goes to feed livestock) and cattle ranchers in particular have deforested an area in the Amazon roughly the combined size of Spain and Germany. Bite something long enough, paraphrasing Nietzsche, and it bites back. Carlos Nobre, one of the foremost experts on the Amazon, told me that if deforestation continues, parts of the Amazon can tip over from forest to savannah, much like a person becoming diabetic, with similar consequences on the water health of South America. Are we close to this tipping point?
“Some believe that the southern Amazon has already tipped over,” Dr Nobre told me. “Indeed, the southern Amazon has become a source of carbon, rather than a sink. I think we are at the edge. With the combined impact of global warming, El Nino, forest fires and current rates of deforestation, I’d say we have about one to two decades before we completely exceed the tipping point.” And what would that mean? “Oh boy! It’s terrible. About 250 billion tonnes of CO2 [about six times annual global emissions] would be released over several decades into the atmosphere.”
Farming animals, at the scale we are, is not sustainable in any sense of the word. Any symphony that sings sustainability but goes silent on this facet sounds off-key.
Until now, I have not mentioned climate change. If the Amazon tips over, the resultant warming will bring famine back into the headlines. For instance, many parts of wheat-growing India are perched on the upper edge of the optimum temperature range for wheat cultivation. As temperatures rise further, yields will fall. Much of Indian wheat relies on groundwater. As that groundwater supply sputters, yields will plummet.
Wheat is not alone. Most crops in India will suffer if they do not adapt to the changing climate. Whether they can adapt fast enough without engineering is unclear. Moreover, India starts on the back foot when it comes to crop climate adaptation, because we have spent the better part of the previous century growing the wrong things in the wrong places.
In pre-colonial India, crop varieties and irrigation systems were designed to cope with swings in rainfall, a must for a country where most of the annual rain falls in about 100 hours. Vast forests moderated flooding and helped maintain dry season river flow. Taxes were usually paid as a share of crop, meaning they were lower in a drought and higher in years with bountiful rains.
Each of these pieces reinforced one another to create a resilient agricultural society that made India fabulously wealthy once. Colonialism changed this.
First, the British cut down vast swathes of forest, destabilising the water regime. Second, they imposed a fixed cash tax on farmers, which made farmers choose to plant cash crops over crops better suited to their local, variable water availability. Canals and dams, built with more than one eye on the return on British capital, accelerated the shift to cash crops. Post-independence, India’s newly minted leaders, anxious to cater to their rural voter base and with an ocean of then-unexploited groundwater to tap into, widened this colonial-crop-legacy faultline by doubling down on cash crops. As a result, a large chunk of India’s crops does not gel with local water regimes.
This square peg-round hole wound stings especially when an El Nino visits India. Think of the El Nino as the warmer upswing of a giant ocean-air seesaw straddling the Pacific Ocean. The Pacific Ocean seesaw (and there are similar seesaws in other oceans) swings up and down every few years, changing global climate and rainfall patterns alongside.
Finance provides a useful metaphor: many of the financial world’s peccadillos lay concealed in a high-liquidity environment, revealed only as monetary conditions tightened. In the same vein, the three-year La Nina (the cooler downswing of the Pacific Ocean seesaw, which helps the monsoon), shielded Indian agriculture somewhat from the talons of the warming climate. Now, with an El Nino in play, there is less “give” in the climate cycle, a tightening of the climate quantitative easing, as it were. Unwise crop choices made in a different era, and climate, are coming to bite, just as bad investments fail as interest rates rise.
One way to adapt is to revert to some of our traditional crops, which can cope with these swings in rainfall. But as long as we have urban palates accustomed to rice and wheat, and as long as the minimum-support-price regime encourages rice and wheat, this adaptation is likely to remain a forlorn hope. It’s like subsiding heroin for an addict while asking them to quit. The moment we look at tinkering with this regime (and we can’t change if we don’t tinker), the predictably shrill chorus of “anti-farmer” erupts.
The path forward
Another way to adapt is to manage the path by which food reaches our plates.
Our path is problematic — we waste food, allow prices to fluctuate wildly and use too much plastic, to name just three issues. We are believed to lose about a third of our food to rot and damage as it travels from farm to fork. Indeed, not understanding where and why we waste our food shows our apathy. Moreover, price swings in vegetables are legendary: we all wept when tomatoes cost more than  ₹  200 per kg, but there is scarcely a peep when they cost less than  ₹  10.
To lessen waste and to keep prices stable requires us to store crops better and process more of our crop (tomato into puree; milk into powder). But storing and processing need investment, ideally from the private sector. Why is this not happening at scale? Look to the chaos that ensued when the farm laws were first announced. Any company or politician thinks twice about entering the farm-produce sector. Honestly, why bother? So, investments remain lower than we need, waste remains high and prices yo-yo each year. The sad part is, storing and processing crops can create climate resilience and the desperately needed jobs in rural India, as I have explored in my book, Watershed (2021).
Plastic is an issue closer to the consumer end of the food supply chain. Estimates of how much plastic is used in the manufacture, packing and transportation of food are, once again, uncertain. When I raised this issue with an expert group, the answer was essentially “Ummm….”. Meanwhile, the evidence of mismanaged plastic in the food supply chain is strewn in every drain in India, and when we look closely enough, in ourselves.
A 2022 Dutch study found plastic particles in human blood — especially polystyrene and PET, both of which are used in food packaging. Even in the face of tightening plastic management rules, we don’t yet fully know how much plastic waste is generated.
How can we hope to manage what we do not measure? And hence, in this industry perhaps more than any other, greenwashing is rife.
Recently, I flew with an airline that generated a net profit of  ₹  1.41 crore every hour in the quarter ending June 2023. And yet, when one peruses this company’s sustainability report, one sees that against waste management, their actions involve “To reduce food wastage on our flights, perishables are served to passengers only against pre-booked orders and only non-perishables with longer shelf life are available for instant orders.” How much has food waste fallen? That is not shared.
They go on to say, that in FY 2022-23, they replaced 83 million single-use plastic offerings with biodegradable options. Yet plastic remains rife in the food offering — single-use plastics lining tin cans, multi-layered packaging, plastic bottles. Worse still, I noticed the crew collecting plastic and food waste together routinely. That’s like dieting for a week only to pig out a big bowl of decadent fudge on Sunday. Unhelpful, at best.
Lastly, in an example of greenwashing at its finest, they say: “We have upcycled 5,000+ waste items that resulted in income generation for a community of women supported by the project.” Oh God. This is literally moving deck chairs on the Titanic. But they are not alone. “Sustainable” is as ubiquitous today as “ecom” was right before the Tech Crash of 2000, or “leveraged investment” was on the eve of the 2008 global financial crisis. Not a comforting thought.
We have a humdinger of a challenge ahead of us: not only do we have to feed more people, we must do so as the climate conspires against us. Consider climate action a relay race with hurdles. In the first leg of the race, the runner was driven by a combination of conscience and curiosity, to overcome the hurdle of ignorance and inertia. That part of the race is run.
The next leg of the relay is about action at scale, where the runner is driven by enlightened self-interest (“let’s do it or we’re screwed”) to overcome entrenched interests and greenwashing. Policy that could help grow food sustainably faces political pushback from entrenched interests and is therefore not crafted or not implemented evenly, allowing greenwashing to paper over cracks. And so, greenwashing is the hurdle to overcome now in climate action.
In recent months, I have felt fear on this front. Not fear of inaction. But of inanity masquerading as heroism in the face of catastrophe.
That’s where resetting the image of sustainable eating can help. We underappreciate the power of our human frailties. More of us will likely eat millets and less animal product every day not because it is climate-resilient but because a celebrity or influencer showed how cool eating this way is.
Seen in this light, the G20 dinner hosted by President Droupadi Murmu that showcased millets as haute cuisine was a great first step. If more influencers and celebrities espoused truly sustainable eating (and they would if they believed they could be called out for greenwashing), this could shift mindset, and get voices across the political spectrum to publicly commit to sustainable eating. Then maybe the next time we tinker with policy, the sopranos of the “anti-farmer” chorus will remain a little muted.
And as demand for sustainable food goes up, farmers can change what they grow, and the crop patterns can become sustainable. Maybe. There are still a lot of “ifs” along the way. Perhaps in the luxury of the clean air today, we cannot see clearly how to move forward. In a month, as the smoke from our unsustainable food choices stings our eyes, perhaps we will see more clearly.


https://www.hindustantimes.com/lifestyle/art-culture/whats-the-next-course-mridula-ramesh-on-the-future-of-sustainable-food-101697820599579.html