New York times 1 
Global Forest Loss Remains High, Despite Recent Progress
Wildfires and agricultural expansion offset big gains in protecting tropical forests last year.
Wildfires and agricultural expansion offset big gains in protecting tropical forests last year.
Burned forest in Fort Chipewyan, Alberta. Wildfires in Canada last year destroyed  almost three times as much forest as in any other year.
Credit...
Victor R. Caivano/Associated Press
Published
April 4, 2024
Updated
April 8, 2024
Despite major progress in protecting vast tracts of rainforest, the world failed again last year to significantly slow the pace of global forest destruction, according to a report issued on Thursday. Record wildfires in Canada and expanding agriculture elsewhere offset big gains in forest protection in Brazil and Colombia, the report found.
The annual survey by the World Resources Institute, a research organization, found that the world lost 9.1 million acres of primary tropical forest in 2023, equivalent to an area almost the size of Switzerland, about 9 percent less than
the year before
. But the improvement failed to put the world on course to halt all forest loss by 2030, a commitment made by 145 nations at global climate talks in Glasgow in 2021 and
reaffirmed by all countries last year
.
Stalled Progress
Gains in Brazil and Colombia were offset by rising deforestation in other areas.
Source: World Resources Institute
Note: Tropical primary tree loss represents removal of mature forests.
Mira Rojanasakul/The New York Times
“Global leaders sent an undeniable message that forests are critical to meeting global climate goals,” said Rod Taylor, the global director for forests at the World Resources Institute. But, he added, “we are far off track and trending in the wrong direction.”
The immense
wildfires in Canada
last year destroyed such a huge tract of boreal forests, almost three times as much as in any other year, that they turned what would have been a 4 percent decrease in global forest loss into a 24 percent increase over the 2022 total.
The report focuses on the tropics because deforestation and fires there are mostly caused by human activity and can create longer-lasting consequences. The humid forests of tropical countries hold a quarter of
all carbon stored on land
and are home to a large share of animal and plant species, making their protection essential both to curb climate change and to avert biodiversity loss.
The Growing Threat of Fire
Fires are an increasingly dominant driver of tree loss worldwide.
Source: World Resources Institute
Note: Total tree loss includes areas outside of primary forests.
Mira Rojanasakul/The New York Times


                
https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/04/climate/global-forest-tree-loss-wri.html?smid=wa-share






New York times 2 
They’ve Got a Plan to Fight Global Warming. It Could Alter the Oceans


They’ve Got a Plan to Fight Global Warming. It Could Alter the Oceans.
Researchers added red dye to the waters off Martha’s Vineyard last year as the initial step in an experiment in increasing the ocean’s ability to absorb carbon dioxide.
Credit...
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
BUYING TIME
They’ve Got a Plan to Fight Global Warming. It Could Alter the Oceans.
Researchers added red dye to the waters off Martha’s Vineyard last year as the initial step in an experiment in increasing the ocean’s ability to absorb carbon dioxide.
Credit...
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Brad Plumer
and
Raymond Zhong
Photographs by
Greta Rybus
Brad Plumer and Greta Rybus reported from Nova Scotia, walking through forests and bobbing on a research boat. Raymond Zhong traveled to Woods Hole, Mass.
Published
Sept. 23, 2024
Updated
Sept. 30, 2024
In a quiet patch of forest in Nova Scotia, a company is building a machine designed to help slow global warming by transforming Earth’s rivers and oceans into giant sponges that absorb carbon dioxide from the air.
When switched on later this year, the machine will grind up limestone inside a tall green silo and release the powder into the nearby West River Pictou, creating a chalky plume that should dissolve within minutes.
The effect could be potent, scientists say. Rivers contain carbon dioxide that is constantly escaping into the air, where it traps heat and warms the planet. But adding limestone converts some of that carbon dioxide into a stable molecule that instead stays underwater and washes into the sea, where it should remain trapped for thousands of years.
“The beauty of it is how simple the technology is,” said Eddie Halfyard, a freshwater ecologist and co-founder of
CarbonRun
, the start-up building the $400,000 limestone machine, with plans for many more. “We let the water do most of the work.”
With the dangers of climate change growing and greenhouse gas emissions soaring, scientists and entrepreneurs are increasingly exploring ways to deliberately intervene in climate systems to cool the Earth. Overwhelmingly, scientists say nations must sharply cut the pollution from burning fossil fuels that is driving up global temperatures. But many also believe that some of the excess carbon in the atmosphere must also be pulled out in order to preserve a livable planet.
“The potential for ocean-based carbon removal is huge, and it’s been really underexplored,” said Nan Ransohoff, who heads Frontier, a $1 billion fund backed by tech giants like Stripe and Alphabet that is
investing heavily in strategies
to take greenhouse gases out of the atmosphere.
                




https://www.nytimes.com/2024/09/23/climate/oceans-rivers-carbon-removal.html?searchResultPosition=2




New York times 3


Hochul Signs Law that Penalizes Companies For Green House Gas Emissions


Gov. Kathy Hochul of New York on Thursday signed a law that requires companies that are big fossil fuel polluters to help pay to repair damage caused by extreme weather, which is becoming more common because of greenhouse gas emissions.
The legislation, called the Climate Change Superfund Act, mandates that the companies responsible for the bulk of carbon emissions buildup between 2000 and 2024 pay about $3 billion each year for 25 years.
“With nearly every record rainfall, heat wave, and coastal storm, New Yorkers are increasingly burdened with billions of dollars in health, safety, and environmental consequences due to polluters that have historically harmed our environment,” Governor Hochul said.
The law was modeled on the original Superfund law, which was established in 1980 and requires companies to pay for the cleanup of toxic waste wrought by incidents like oil and chemical spills.
New York’s new law focuses on pollution produced by the combustion of fossil fuels, which results in the warming of the atmosphere, causing extreme weather, like floods and storms, to be more frequent, experts say.
The idea is to take some of the burden off taxpayers, who now are on the hook for financing much of the cleanup and mitigation efforts after weather disasters. The law takes particular aim at the oil and gas companies that produced more than one billion tons of greenhouse gas emissions globally over the last 24 years.
Subscribe to The Times to read as many articles as you like.


https://www.nytimes.com/2024/12/26/nyregion/hochul-climate-change-superfund-law.html?searchResultPosition=6




New York times 4 


Warming Is Getting Worse. So They Just Tested a Way to Deflect the Sun.
A spraying machine designed for cloud brightening on the flight deck of the Hornet, a decommissioned aircraft carrier that is now a museum in Alameda, Calif.
Buying Time
Warming Is Getting Worse. So They Just Tested a Way to Deflect the Sun.
A spraying machine designed for cloud brightening on the flight deck of the Hornet, a decommissioned aircraft carrier that is now a museum in Alameda, Calif.
Credit...
Christopher Flavelle
Photographs by
Ian C. Bates
Christopher Flavelle reported from a decommissioned aircraft carrier in Alameda, Calif. He spoke with scientists, environmentalists and government officials.
Published
April 2, 2024
Updated
Sept. 30, 2024
A little before 9 a.m. on Tuesday, an engineer named Matthew Gallelli crouched on the deck of a decommissioned aircraft carrier in San Francisco Bay, pulled on a pair of ear protectors, and flipped a switch.
A few seconds later, a device resembling a snow maker began to rumble, then produced a great and deafening hiss. A fine mist of tiny aerosol particles shot from its mouth, traveling hundreds of feet through the air.
It was the first outdoor test in the United States of technology designed to brighten clouds and bounce some of the sun’s rays back into space, a way of temporarily cooling a planet that is now dangerously overheating. The scientists wanted to see whether the machine that took years to create could consistently spray the right size salt aerosols through the open air, outside of a lab.
If it works, the next stage would be to aim at the heavens and try to change the composition of clouds above the Earth’s oceans.
As humans continue to burn fossil fuels and pump increasing amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, the goal of holding global warming to a relatively safe level, 1.5 degrees Celsius compared with preindustrial times, is slipping away. That has pushed the idea of deliberately intervening in climate systems closer to reality.


                


https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/02/climate/global-warming-clouds-solar-geoengineering.html?searchResultPosition=9




Washington post 1 
Transcript: Climate Solutions: Saving Our Living Planet
March 9, 2021
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Good morning, and welcome to Washington Post Live. I’m Frances Stead Sellers, a senior writer at The Washington Post.
I'm delighted to greet this morning, two experts in wildlife conservation. Dr. David Suzuki is the co-founder of The David Suzuki Foundation. He's an environmental activist and a well-known broadcaster in Canada. Jeff Corwin, who is also with us, is a well-known, Emmy award-winning television broadcaster and also a biologist. Welcome to you both.
MR. CORWIN: Good to be here.
DR. SUZUKI: Delighted.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Thank you for joining us.
Jeff, let's start with you. Over the past four decades, we've lost something like 70 percent of global wildlife. What's gone on, and what role have humans played in this huge reduction in species?
MR. CORWIN: Well, Frances, it's quite startling and sobering to think that in the lifetime of a healthy human being on earth, of an adult, we've consumed between 60 and 70 percent of all nature, and the great challenge for us to figure out is how do we rectify this.
We know the reasons why, and I kind of look at extinction for what I kind of think of as the perfect extinction storm is the result of this concoction, this formula which includes climate change, habitat loss, pollution, species exploitation, and human population growth. All of those factors independently, we can see how that they would have an impact on the environment, but they actually don't operate in a vacuum. They conspire and influence each other.
So, for example, deforestation of a thousand acres of rainforest in Southeast Asia--and globally, we lose about 3,000 acres of rainforest every hour. But that one moment for, let's say, a palm oil plantation directly leads to the black wildlife trade of endangered species such as orangutans and tigers. That carbon, which has been sequestered in that ecosystem, is then released into the atmosphere through the process of climate change.
So, we could see how these instruments of extinction work together leading to this unprecedented moment where today we lose as many species as the result of our species as was lost when an asteroid slammed into the earth 60-plus million years ago.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Wow, David, help me understand a little bit more about what we lose when we lose--what we as humans lose when we lose all these animal species. What's going on here?
DR. SUZUKI: That's the critical question. I think the problem is that we now feel that as a creature, we're so intelligent that we have somehow escaped the web of connections or relationships that we have with the rest of life on earth as well as the air, the water, the soil, and the sunlight.
This is the way humans have seen themselves since the beginning of our species, that we are deeply embedded in and utterly dependent on that web of relationships. But now I think it began around the Renaissance when people like Francis Bacon were saying, "Wisdom is power." Descartes said, "I think, therefore I am."
We started to elevate ourselves outside of the web of living things. We think we're in charge because we're so smart. We don't have to obey any of the natural laws. We can get into a machine and travel faster than the speed of sound. We can listen to sounds coming from the edge of the universe. We can look down and see in a drop of water, all kinds of living organisms. We're really pretty super, and we're going to take over the planet and make it over in our own interest.
And that's the problem. We've created our legal system, our economic system, and our political system, all about serving us, but we saw last week, Dasgupta report out of the United Kingdom the economic system ignores nature, as if nature is irrelevant, except in the ways that we can use it. And so, we've removed ourselves from the web of relationships, and so we've become very, very disruptive.
What COVID shows us is, this tiny piece of RNA that can't even reproduce on its own. It's got to invade a living cell in order to make copies of itself. That tiny bit of RNA has said, "The hell with your boundaries. Human borders don't mean anything to me. Spread in the air," and guess what? All these anti-maskers don't acknowledge that what comes out of their nose goes straight up my nose. It seems to me there's a responsibility there.
COVID is showing us we've gotten too big for our britches, and it's now leading to a world in which human survival has become a question.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Do you think this is an extinction crisis that went on?
DR. SUZUKI: Of course, it is. Absolutely. We're the top predator on the planet now, and all--as systems underneath us collapse, don't you think that that's going to have an impact on ourselves? It's foolhardy.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Right. So, Jeff--
MR. CORWIN: We live in a time, Frances--we live in a time--
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Yeah, go ahead.
MR. CORWIN: --now where we lose a species on average about once every half an hour to an hour, disappears forever. Many of these species remain undiscovered and unknown to science. So, when you add that up, that well within our lifetimes, the three of us today, we may see 15 to 20 percent of species alive today gone in our tomorrow. My children, my daughters, which are now about to--are young women, by the time they are my age and they have children, they will likely see that 50 percent of all species upon our planet are gone forever, of no point of return.
So, we are in an extinction crisis, and how we need to look at the loss of these remarkable species, as the canary in the coal mine for the survival of our own species, because as David has beautifully illustrated, COVID has shown us really how organic and how biological we really are, that despite all our technology, we cannot escape the frailties of flesh, blood, and water, and we can fall prey to the tiniest of predators.
And, of course, it's very likely that the COVID scenario we find ourselves in is literally us opening up the Pandora's box of disease as we exploit ecosystems around the world, especially in the tropics.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Jeff, I want to take you just back quickly to pre-COVID days and your trips to Alaska because there you saw whole villages disappearing under water. Can you talk to me a little bit about the connection between climate change and conservation?
MR. CORWIN: Well, there's a huge connection between climate change and conservation, and I don't know--David probably could hark on to this. In places like Canada or Alaska where you have people that have a connection to natural resources, fishermen or other people that work in those industries, they're the first people today that validate the presence of climate change, because when you're a remote Alaskan community that sits there on the banks of a river ecosystem waiting for that resource to swim up, the salmon, and you have to completely be relocated because the substrate beneath your feet is no longer sustainable because the melt of permafrost, that shows you the power of climate change.
And, ultimately, by us rectifying or working to mitigate climate change, it becomes a backdoor solution and opportunity to help recover endangered species, because in the end, to prevent the loss of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, it will require us to protect and wisely manage habitats such as forests and coastal ecosystems.
We know that climate change is not just a problem for nature. It's very much a challenge to the survival of humanity.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: David--
DR. SUZUKI: But, Jeff, you know, one of the things I feel about the conservation movement, we tend to look at the big charismatic stuff, you know, the snow leopard or the cheetah or the whales, but really, we've devastated the planet with this crazy idea of managing our pests with insecticides. We're killing all insects, for example, just to get at a few that are pests to us.
We've sprayed--I mean, I've always loved insects. I have to admit they've been a passion with me since I was a kid, and the idea that we spray insecticides to kill all insects and we're only after one or two species that are infecting our crops or spreading disease among humans, this is where we really see consequences, but we're not focused on that.
We've declared war against insects. We're spraying pesticides into air, water, and soil, and now we've devastated them. That, I think, is going to have huge repercussions through the web of life. We just don't understand the extent to which we are embedded and utterly dependent on nature.
Frances, if I may have a moment.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Yes, yes.
DR. SUZUKI: I was invited to give a talk to the first green buildings conference in Austin, Texas. This must have been in the late 1990s. Anyway, it was a big audience, and there were a lot of kids in the audience. I said, "Now, kids, if you remember one thing about my talk, remember we are animals." I was shocked at how angry parents got. A woman came up to me and said, "Don't you call my daughter an animal. She's a human being," and I said, "Madam, I'm a biologist, and if she's not an animal, is she a plant?" As an animal, what do you think your most--absolutely most important thing is that you need? Air.
MR. CORWIN: David--
DR. SUZUKI: If you don't have clean air for three minutes, you're dead. If you have to breathe contaminated or polluted air, you're sick. So, surely, air, clean air should be this incredible gift from nature that we acknowledge and we have a responsibility to protect.
And it's the same. We can go down water. You and I, we're 60 to 70 percent water by weight, but we leak water out of our skin and our mouth and our eyes. If you don't have water for four to six days, you're dead. If you have to drink contaminated water, you're sick. So clean water.
You know, we don't put the proper things that absolutely support us: clean air, clean water, clean soil and the food we get, and clean energy that comes from photosynthesis. Those are the things, and what delivers those, what Indigenous people call the "four sacred elements"--earth, air, fire, and water--what delivers those to us is the web of living things that Jeff is an expert on now.
You know, the web of life without plants, we don't have air that animals like us can breathe. Without soil organisms, the water percolates through the soil and is filtered for us. Without them, we're in trouble.
So, over and over again, we forget that we are still biological creatures, and our absolutely most important thing is the integrity of the web of living things that give us the most important elements.
But, over and over again, it's, oh, the economy. What about the economy? The economy becomes a dominant thing.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Jeff, a question for you. There are almost 8 billion of us now. How do we create those bounds that David is outlining? How do we feed people? How do we manage interactions between wildlife and people as the populations grow?
MR. CORWIN: That's a great and very complex and dynamite question to answer. The truth is we may be very close to the point, if we're not beyond that point, of managing that situation.
I believe we are the last generation to truly secure the wild legacy of our planet, and just to touch back upon what David discussed, we do kind of get distracted by the big and the sexy, what we call--what's been referred to as "charismatic species syndrome." We're quick to jump to save a leopard or a lion or a tiger, understandably, that these creatures are symbolic and very important to their ecosystems, but really equally important to that ecosystem is a community of termites in the rainforest where a jaguar might live. This small microcosmos community of creatures, the world of bats and amphibians, these small innocuous creatures are really the keystone species that stitch all these ecosystems together.
So, as David had indicated, when you see something like insects or amphibian species, which have time-tested five extinctions, but yet not to survive the human extinction event, tells us that we are severely out of whack.
I will tell you I think that if there is one promising opportunity when it comes to saving our planet, it would be number one is to protect habitat and to restore habitat. Number two is to find some level of truly meaningful a sense of sustainability of how we live with the planet; and also, number three, which a lot of people don't realize is to work with people around the world that often are connected to these imperiled ecosystems, such as rainforests in Southeast Asia or Africa or South America, disenfranchised communities, and empower them with economic opportunities through sustainability. Make them, long term, connected to the conservation of that project or that endangered ecosystem. It's critically important because that's the challenge we face.
We can't protect what we do not know and appreciate. We will never appreciate it and know it if we never get to experience and meet it, and I think for us, that is one of our greatest challenges is to know that these ecosystems and these wild species that are evaporating and vaporizing before our very eyes really are the cornerstones of the building blocks of the survival of humanity.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: You've both been talking about issues that play off in a global and national and an individual level, and I'm curious. Are there any countries that are leading the way and providing models for how to live better with the wild environment it's inherited?
DR. SUZUKI: Well, I think from my experience, Bhopal--sorry--Bhutan--Bhutan is one of the shining lights where the king at one time in a meeting in India was asked by reporters, "What is Bhutan's GNP?" gross national product, and he looked puzzled and he said, "Well, we don't care about the GNP. We care about the GHP, the gross happiness product," that happiness is the goal of his king, kingship, and of his government, that what is this stuff about the gross national product, you know, just making more stuff and keeping the economy growing?
And they've got a record now. I worry about it because they were quite isolated from the rest of the world until very recently. Now they're being assaulted. They're surrounded by China on one hand, India on the other, and they've now penetrated with a road and with television. They are being assaulted with all the ads saying buy a car and all that other stuff.
So, I don't know, but they've protected 70 percent of their forests. All of their farming is organic. They live very, very low on the ecological chain. They're a great example, but I don't think most North Americans will want to live at the level that they are at. We've become so convinced that consumption and stuff is a measure of our lifestyle and happiness that we won't be able to go back to the kind of life that I've been leading under the COVID lockdown.
COVID forced me--and at that time, I was like Jeff. I was at my cabin on an island when our government said no more movement, and fortunately, my wife and my youngest daughter, her husband and three children were with us. It was the happiest time of my life. It was wonderful, and, you know, we'd go out every day, rain or shine. We were out in the woods looking for frogs. There are a few frogs left, you'll be glad to know, Jeff. We even found an alligator lizard. I didn't know there were any reptiles other than snakes there. It was a wonderful time, and so I wonder why are we in such a hurry. Why are we rushing everywhere? You know, we've got to do this. We've got to--let's spend time with each other. It's wonderful.
But we can't go on. The world is, in fact, overpopulated with our species, but it's not just a function of how many people there are. You have to multiply per capita consumption to get an idea of our population impact on the planet, and when you include consumption, it's the industrialized world that is just overpopulated, far too many of us taking too much stuff out of the earth.
We don't have time now. We simply have run out of time. We've got a crisis, and I look back to a time--I was in my--beginning my senior year at Amherst College in 1957. Do you know what happened on October 4th?
MS. STEAD SELLERS: No.
DR. SUZUKI: The Soviet Union shocked us by launching Sputnik.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Right.
DR. SUZUKI: And it was a shock, and every hour and a half, that satellite went overhead, and it was going "ha, ha, ha, beep, beep, beep," and it was like flaunting itself to American technology.
Well, America responded. They had three rockets--Army, Navy, Air Force--and they set their rockets up in full television view. Every one blew up. Meanwhile, the Russians launched the first animal in space, a dog, the first man, Yuri Gagarin, the first team of cosmonauts, the first space walk, the first woman, Valentina Tereshkova.
And the response in the United States was astonishing. Nobody said, "Oh, my God, they're too far ahead. We can't catch up. It's going to destroy our economy." They just said, "We've got to catch up to these guys," and the United States began to pour money into universities, set up NASA, supporting NSF, all kinds of organizations.
Here I am a Canadian studying in the United States. All I had to do was say, "I like science," and they poured money at me. I mean, it was a glorious time to be a science student.
And look at what happened. In 1962, President Kennedy said, "We choose to go to the moon," and that was the beginning of the American race to get to the moon.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Right.
DR. SUZUKI: At that time, the United States had no idea how the hell they were going to get there. They just knew that's a target we might be able to reach, and they poured every effort into it.
And I want to tell all those people that say global warming is too much, we can't afford, it will destroy it. What resulted, not only was the United States the only country to land people on the moon and get them back, but every year when Nobel Prizes in science are announced, guess who still gets a huge number of them? It's Americans, because 60 years ago, the United States said, "We got to catch up to these guys," and every year, NASA publishes a magazine called "Spinoff" and lists hundreds of technologies and businesses that spun off from the space program. Nobody planned that.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Okay.
DR. SUZUKI: It's just because Kennedy said, "We've got to get to the moon in a decade," and that's what the opportunity is in confronting climate change. We have a short window, but it's an enormous opportunity, and it's un-American to say, "We can't do this. It will cost too much." That's not the America I knew when I was studying in the United States.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: That's a great insight.
And, Jeff, I'd love to have you talk about--we had many viewers writing in and saying, "What can we do as individuals?" and you've both raised the issue of COVID and how things have changed. Is this a moment for redressing our approach? What can people do? What's your advice to viewers who are listening in today?
MR. CORWIN: Well, Frances, I think COVID does remind us how organic and biological we really are. It forced us, as David got to do with his family on his wonderful island retreat, to stay together, step back, take a breath.
I can tell you before COVID, that year, just a little over a year ago, I traveled to 22 countries. This year, I've been on a plane twice. So that is the power of COVID, and a lot of us like to look at COVID to see how the earth got to bite back a little bit, a lot of anecdotal stories of fish returning to the waterways of Venice or wild sheep running down the streets of an urban environment in Europe, all these great wonderful stories, a pride of lions taking over a highway in South Africa. The truth is we would need 20 to 30 years-plus of COVIDs to truly try to get the genie back in the COVID bottle.
So, what COVID does is it does remind us that we can make a change. We can make a difference, but we need to make radical change and big differences. So, what are the differences and changes we can make in our own lives? I would say take a deep breath and know that you matter as an individual, politically, the power of your vote, as a consumer, as David said, the resource you consume.
We talk about palm oil plantations destroying rainforests in Southeast Asia. Well, one out of every ten products in a U.S. or Canadian supermarket contains palm oil. To recognize we are both a part of the challenge and we are a part of the solution in fixing the problem.
So, it's realizing the power you have and the decisions you make as a consumer politically, and what can you do in your own community beginning with resources in environments that are challenged, that need protection and need conservation? I think it's these pragmatic steps we make today, and as David said, what is our Sputnik moment? What is our Sputnik reality check, our moon launch moment where we say, "Well, now let's look at this great dilemma where we face that our planet is in peril and our species is facing a fight for survival? What can we do with the technologies we have today to reduce significantly the 10 billion pounds of plastics we put in our oceans every year, to wisely restore habitat, to build causeways of living wild communities connecting protected habitats? Looking at the great successes we've had, Frances, in, for example, taking a species like the California condor, which was extinct in the wild and now survives, tinkering on the edge but surviving in the wild, recovered endangered species like black-footed ferrets. Like the bald eagle which was once pushed to the brink of extinction has recovered magnificently. So, we know if we step forward and step up, we can make a difference, but we're doing it for our children.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: We've been brought to our knees by a zoonotic virus, one that came from the animal world. Are countries doing enough to regulate wildlife trade? Is the U.S. doing enough?
Maybe, David, you could take that quickly, and then we may have time for one last question.
DR. SUZUKI: I don't know. I'm the Canadian. I don't know. I'm a Canadian, but I've watched you live with four years of absolute insanity where the domination of economics and politics has overridden science. And, you know, we had eight and a half years of a prime minister who said, "We can't do anything about climate change. It will destroy the economy." That's crazy economics.
Here's Canada, as a northern country, probably more vulnerable to climate change than any other industrialized country, and the Inuit people in the north have been telling us for 20 years that climate change has kicked in. And we've had eight and a half years of a prime minister who denied that this was even an issue that he wanted to consider.
So, this is a point. We've run out of time. Of course, there are all kinds of ways that we all can have an impact. There are dozens of books out on what you can do, but right now, I believe the most important thing is we need big decisions.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has given us the challenge. If we want climate to simply become chaotic, then if we want to stop that, we've got to keep temperature rising above 2 degrees, preferably keep it to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels. That means we have to get rid of fossil fuels by 50 percent by 2030. I think it's a goal we won't be able to obtain, but we need government, seeing the change in government in the United States, and the attitude towards climate change has been huge.
Whether or not he can drive that through Congress in the way the split is in this country, I really--I wonder about it. So, what I say is we saw before COVID, we saw this unbelievable movement of children coming up and saying, "Why should we go to school? We listen to the scientists, and scientists are telling us we don't have a future, the way we're going." That was very, very powerful, and it's tragic that COVID brought that to a halt. But I'm still working with young people saying, "Look, you kids don't vote, but your mom and dad do. Your grandma and grandpa do. Your aunts and uncles do. Now, when we come out of COVID, you've got to get them, all of them to be actively engaged in politics and saying we will only support politicians. I don't care what party you're in, but is climate change your number one issue?" And that's what we need at this time. We need to make this an issue governments will take seriously in the way the United States did in 1957 when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Jeff, do you have any reason for optimism? We have to go very quickly, our last question, but any reason for optimism that will have the Sputnik moment?
MR. CORWIN: I do have--I do have hope, and the recovery of endangered species that I've actually physically experienced with my own daughter, seeing black-footed ferrets, she got to be a part of that. This was a species, case closed, officially extinct three or four decades ago. Now there's 2,000 surviving in the wild.
I mean, the reality is you'd look just to Africa, for example. A hundred years ago, we had over 10 million elephants. Today we only have 400,000 elephants remaining. The lion population in under 70 years has been reduced from half a million to 20,000 individuals. Only about 5,000 rhinos are left. We are at that breaking point. It is not too late, but it really requires a radical thinking of where we want to be on this planet with regard to what the natural resources our children will have.
So, yes, there is hope. We could look to the light of true success in conservation, but yet the door is closing fast. We're the last generation to make a difference, and that difference needs to happen now, but there is still hope.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Well, we're going to take that message of hope but also heard very clearly from you both about the breaking point.
David Suzuki, Jeff Corwin, thank you both very much for joining me today on Washington Post Live.
DR. SUZUKI: Thank you very much.
MR. CORWIN: Thanks for having me.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: We're delighted to have you.
And I'll be back soon with wildlife conservationist Krithi Karanth. See you soon.
[Video plays]
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Good morning. If you're just joining us, I'm Frances Stead Sellers.
I'm delighted to now welcome Dr. Krithi Karanth. She's the chief conservationist in Bangalore, and welcome, Krithi. You come from--
DR. KARANTH: Hi. Thank you for having me.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: I had a slight delay there. Apologies.
You come from one of the most populous countries in the world, where there's a lot of interaction between wildlife and people, and I'd love for you to describe to us some of the challenges that presents and some of the solutions you have.
DR. KARANTH: So, we at the Center for Wildlife Studies have done work all across India. We've gone to over 3,000 villages, trying to understand human-wildlife conflict, and this is people losing lives, people being injured, losing livestock, having their crops destroyed, having their property damaged. And our work has established actually that India is an extraordinarily high-conflict country, but it's also a sign that a lot of the conservation efforts that have been made in the last 50 years have brought wildlife back. And the combination of shrinking habitats and success of conservation in some places, shrinking habitats in other places has led to people and large animals, particularly tigers, leopards, elephants coming into more frequent contact resulting in these losses.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: So, you have introduced innovation and technology to try to overcome some of these problems. Could you describe that to us, how it works, and what sort of impact it's having?
DR. KARANTH: So, having done the research, you know, I identified that in India, regardless of how poor and how rich you are, everybody has access to a mobile phone. So, we launched the Wild Seve program five years ago around two national parks in southern India, and it's as simple as if you have a conflict incident taking place with a leopard on your roof or an elephant in your farm, you call in to us. Our staff will arrive on the scene and help you document the incident and file the claim.
But we as an organization don't pay out the compensation. The government actually has set aside a significant amount of money to pay the compensation. So, the compensation actually comes from the government. We just act as the bridge between people and wildlife to make sure the claims are processed, there are no delays, and that, you know, when families suffer 30, 40 elephant crop raiding incidents in a season, that they don't get frustrated and then retaliate by electrocuting the animal. Rather, they call out to us, and we are able to help them.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: And then do you do anything about removing the animals so the incidents don't happen again?
DR. KARANTH: No. We don't do any of that. That is the responsibility of the government.
So, our role is really to help and assist, you know, assist in documenting the claim and making sure the incident is recorded and people receive help, because what happens, over a period of time, it's not one incident. Some families may have 30, 50 incidents over the last five years, and as you can see, in countries like the U.S., a wolf shows up in Colorado after decades, people go out and shoot it. And the difference about India is high densities of people still have enormous cultural, social tolerance for these losses, and they will not retaliate unless something really goes wrong. And, typically, it's when there's a human being that's injured or killed, they suffer a lot of losses, and my point is compensation is one way to assist people, and it's sort of a short--our Wild Seve program is a short-term way to address this.
But we're also investing in other solutions. We have a conservation education program called Wild Shaale, where we're working with hundreds of thousands of children living around these wildlife parks, getting them to understand and be excited about seeing a tiger, seeing an elephant, building empathy and interest in wildlife and wild places, and that's more of a long-term solution where you're building stewardship in those communities that truly make the difference on whether something would survive or not.
So, having done both of these programs, now with support from Rolex, we're able to kind of scale the work to a large part of India, and we're hoping to do this work across the entire Western Ghats, which is one of the world's 30 biodiversity hotspots. But it also has 27 million people living in and around wildlife, and I feel that if we can solve problems in India, which is really at sort of the extreme edge of tension between people and wildlife, these solutions can be replicated, simplified, adapted to other parts of the world.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: How did you become interested in this work? It's so fascinating how it's developed. Is it deeply ingrained in your own background?
DR. KARANTH: So, I had an amazing childhood. My dad is a well-known tiger conservationist and biologist himself, Dr. Ullas Karanth. So, he started taking me to the jungle when I was a year old. So, I literally spent the first 16, 17 years of my childhood just watching animals and having two parents who were scientists, got to see how scientific questions are asked, how do scientific projects get done, and really got this amazing firsthand glimpse into the beauty of science and research but also saw the difficult conservation battles that he and many of his colleagues fought.
When I was a teenager, I tried to rebel away from this profession, but ultimately, when I was doing my master's at Yale, I came back to following in his footsteps, in some sense. But he's very much of an ecologist. I'm very much on the human side because I feel that if you don't solve human problems, you're not going to be able to save these amazing species and amazing places on the planet.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: I've seen that you've brought art and photography and all sorts of other sort of human elements into your work. Can you talk about that and how you integrate them into what is essentially human science?
DR. KARANTH: So, for me, I had the privilege of being chosen as National Geographic's 10,000th grantee ten years ago, and when you work with an organization that's such a powerful storyteller, you learn that any number of scientific publications is not going to get the message out. You need to make documentaries. You need to make children--write children's books. You need to get more creative ways of getting people to feel connected to animal life, and so all of our work now uses art and storytelling and games to engage a much broader set of people.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Well, that's fascinating.
And what is the most important message you think people should take away from animal-human interactions, whether it's foxes in downtown Washington, D.C., or tigers in southern India?
DR. KARANTH: I think species are resilient. This pandemic has millions of people sharing all these animals kind of walking on different streets around the world. Species know how to come back. Nature knows how to heal itself. I think what we need to do as humans is to, you know, as Jeff and David said, learn to step back, consume less, have a lower ecological footprint, and learn to share the planet with thousands and thousands of other species that have every right to be here as we do.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Yeah. David raised Bhutan as a good example of a country that had learned to live in a slower way and with more acceptance of the land around people. Do you see a model in the work you're doing that could be translated to other countries beyond India?
DR. KARANTH: Even India is a very complex country. We're 1.4 billion people. People's tolerance to wildlife varies across the country.
So, in northwest India, there's far more tolerance and then in southern and northeastern India perhaps not enough, and so species are revered for social reasons, cultural reasons, economic reasons. And I think you need to tap into that emotional side of why people care for particular species and build on that. I don't think it can just be a biologist argument for saving species, and I think there's an amazing set of ways to do that today.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Talk a little bit more about them. You talked about children's books and about documentaries, but how do you communicate this message in a way that doesn't also have people trespassing into territory or invading more in animal lands?
DR. KARANTH: So, one thing we've done, as you know, our field experiences have connected us with adults in communities, children in communities, particularly focusing on people who live around wildlife areas, and we've kind of used the power of storytelling and making things relevant and context-specific. You can't copy and paste this across the world. You have to talk about bears to somebody who sees bears. You've got to talk about wolves to somebody who sees wolves. And I think it has to be something tangible that they can see and feel.
And for me, you know, during the pandemic, CWS actually launched an amazing program which does community public health and outreach, where we're actually going into these remote communities, educating them about the big animals, why is there conflict happening, how do you stay safe, about the little guys. We identified six zoonotic diseases common to this part of India where we work in. What are these zoonotics? How do you minimize your risk to them beyond COVID-19? And then also we do also a first aid session of if you do get injured or hurt, this is what you do and don't.
And I think this level of awareness has to be there. We're working with frontline government agencies, community organizations, for them to contextualize what matters and who do they live and how do they cope with loss, how do they cope with injury.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: So, take us five or ten years ahead in your own work. Where would you like to be, and what would you like to see happening?
DR. KARANTH: I think for me, one of the things, unlike the U.S. and China which have more than 15 percent of land set aside for wildlife, Bhutan and Costa Rica that have more than 30 percent set aside, India unfortunately only has 5 percent of land protected. That 5 percent is actually reasonably well managed by the government, but I think we need to aspire to rewild India, and that we shouldn't be settling at 5 percent. We should at least aspire to build the space for wildlife to about 10 percent of the country.
It is possible. There are private ways of doing this. There are community engagements that can facilitate creating community and individual-managed results. There's a lot of successful models of that across the world but not so much in India.
So, I really want large corporations, individuals, and communities to actually engage in saving wildlife in India, beyond what is mandated by the government at this point.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: We talked in the earlier conservation--and you've raised it too--of the sort of temporary benefits and awareness that COVID has brought to us from the arrival of a new zoonotic disease to our sudden sites of wildlife taking over human areas. Do you see it as a moment that reset our relationship with the world around us?
DR. KARANTH: I hope so. I'm not sure. I think it terrifies me today where when people are still talking about the pandemic, they're talking about sort of adding solutions post the pandemic, and I'm like we need to go back to the root cause of why are zoonotics emerging from forested areas. And this one may have come from China, but the next one could very well come from India or Africa. And we need to fundamentally realize when people are tinkering with nature, when you're fragmenting habitats, and you have people going in and out, you are going to cause diseases to jump.
Unfortunately, my biggest fear is that this is not the first one. We may get past this one with some vaccines, but in our lifetimes, we're going to see many more pandemics and epidemics emerge. And when are we going to kind of think of long-term solutions rather than short-term solutions of solving a situation like this?
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Just one last question. Are you optimistic that we will come up with those long-term solutions?
DR. KARANTH: Absolutely. Conservation is a very depressing field. We lose most of the time, but I fundamentally believe--I've done this for 23 years. I will do this until I no longer exist. I've seen technology. I've seen education. I've seen films. I've seen a whole range of things get people to care more for nonhuman life on the planet, and we need to push harder on that, build a broader base of people who care for wildlife. And I think we're at that--we are the generation that's going to go and kind of define the difference between extinction and rewilding, and we have to do more at this point.
MS. STEAD SELLERS: Krithi Karanth, thank you very much for that reminder about the importance of rewilding and for your ultimate optimism. I'm afraid that's all we have time for. Thank you.
DR. KARANTH: Thank you very much.




https://www.washingtonpost.com/washington-post-live/2021/03/09/transcript-climate-solutions-saving-our-living-planet/


Washington post 2 
Humanity’s greatest ally against climate change is Earth itself
Ecosystems can draw down carbon and buffer us from the worst effects of climate change — but only if we protect them
April 22, 2021
764
Earth reflects light from the sun, as seen from the International Space Station in a photo taken by European Space Agency astronaut Alexander Gerst. (Alexander Gerst/ESA/Getty Images)
By Sarah Kaplan
Spring has returned to the California coast, bringing with it abundant sunshine and calmer seas. Storm-tossed sands settle. Nourishing cold water floods in from offshore. It is time for a climate superhero to emerge.
Giant kelp is among the best organisms on the planet for taking planet-warming gases out of the atmosphere. Buoyed by small, gas-filled bulbs called “bladders,” these huge algae grow toward the ocean surface at a pace of up to two feet per day. Their flexible stems and leafy blades form a dense underwater canopy that can store 20 times as much carbon as an equivalent expanse of terrestrial trees.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-solutions/2021/04/22/earth-day-biodiversity/ 


Washington post  3 
Planet-warming pollution is growing at the fastest rate in history, scientists say
Most of the growth comes from people burning coal, oil and gas, the report said.
October 28, 2024
4 min
943
The Liddell Power Station in Muswellbrook, Australia, was decommissioned in 2023 after 52 years in operation. (Roni Bintang/Getty Images
By Sarah Kaplan
Planet-warming pollution in Earth’s atmosphere last year hit the highest levels in human history, scientists announced Monday — a worrying indicator of the world’s failure to curb climate change as global temperatures are on track to hit yet another record high.
Ask your climate questions. With the help of generative Al, we'll try to deliver answers based on our published reporting.
Concentrations of carbon dioxide — the most important driver of global warming — are now growing faster than at any time since our species evolved, according to the World Meteorological Organization’s annual Greenhouse Gas Bulletin. The increase can be traced back to stubbornly high rates of fossil fuel consumption, the report said, as well as ecosystems that are becoming more likely to produce emissions and potentially less capable of absorbing excess carbon.
What readers are saying
The comments reflect a deep concern about climate change, with discussions on the rapid increase in CO2 levels and its causes, including human activity and natural processes. Some commenters criticize the article for lacking specific data and perspective, particularly regarding... Show more
https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/10/28/wmo-report-record-greenhouse-gases/
Washington post  4 


Where forest fires have caused an alarming increase in carbon emissions
Fires in non-tropical forests have steadily emitted more carbon each year since 2001, releasing an additional half a billion tons of carbon dioxide annually, a new study has found.
October 17, 2024
5 min
A tree burns as the Line Fire spreads near Big Bear Lake in San Bernardino County, Calif., on Sept. 30. (David Swanson/AFP/Getty Images)
When a tree burns, it releases carbon dioxide that can further trap heat on Earth. A new study is showing an exceptionally large increase in these emissions from a steadily warming corner of our forested planet.



Carbon dioxide emissions from forest fires have increased by 60 percent globally in the past two decades, according to a study published in the journal Science on Thursday. Northernmost boreal forests, such as in North America and Eurasia, are among the largest emitters, where emissions nearly tripled from 2001 to 2023.
t




https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/10/17/forest-fires-carbon-emissions/




USA today 1 
THE CLAIM: PAST CLIMATE CHANGE SHOWS MODERN CLIMATE CHANGE ISN'T CAUSED BY HUMANS
A Jan. 17 Facebook post (  direct link  ,  archive link  ) shows two distinctly different images of Earth. One, labeled "now," features blue oceans and green-toned continents. The other, labeled "4.5 billion years ago," has what appears to be ice sheet-covered continents and red and yellow oceans.
"The environment of Earth has been continually changing for 4.5 BILLION YEARS!" reads some text surrounding the image. "The idea that 'Climate Change' is new or is caused by Humans is nonsense."
The post was shared more than 700 times in less than two weeks.


OUR RATING: FALSE
Earth's climate has changed throughout history for numerous reasons, but an abundance of evidence shows modern climate change is driven by human behavior. There is no evidence the post's depiction of ancient Earth is accurate.


'OVERWHELMING' EVIDENCE HUMANS ARE CHANGING EARTH'S CLIMATE
Earth's climate has varied significantly over its  roughly 4.5 billion-year history  ,  Taylor Perron  , a geologist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, told USA TODAY.
"There were times when Earth was warmer than it is now and times when Earth was colder than it is now," he said in an email. "But the fact that Earth has been warmer and colder in the past doesn't mean that the current warming trend is not dangerous, and it doesn't mean that humans aren't the cause."
Humans are causing modern climate change  through activity that releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere − such as fossil fuel combustion and deforestation. The  warming property of these gases  , such as CO2, has been  known since the 1800s  .
Human activity has increased the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere by 50% since 1750,  according to NASA.
Earth's average temperature has warmed over this same timeframe, and "the  amount of warming  we see matches what we expect based on the  increased CO2  we've added,"  Josh Willis  , a NASA climate scientist,  previously told USA TODAY  . "The timing of the warming matches the timing of the CO2 increase caused by people."
Fact check  :
Researchers know the excess CO2 was contributed by humans because it  matches the amount humans have produced  (after natural processes are accounted for) and because atmospheric CO2 contains a  disproportionate amount of the type of carbon found in fossil fuels  .
"There are many different 'fingerprints' that have been clearly identified by scientists as evidence that industrial pollution is the cause of recent global heating,"  Dargan Frierson  , an atmospheric scientist at the University of Washington,  previously told USA TODAY  . "This is not exactly a 'whodunit' situation. The evidence is overwhelming that fossil fuel burning is the culprit."


PAST CLIMATE CHANGE EVENTS DRIVEN BY DIFFERENT PHENOMENA
Earth's past climate changes were driven by a variety of events  , including changes in Earth's orbit and orientation to the sun, fluctuations in the amount of solar radiation striking Earth, volcanic activity and changes in ocean circulation patterns, according to researchers.
"What's alarmingly different about the global warming happening now is how fast it's happening and how it's clearly associated with humans adding greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide to the atmosphere," Perron said. "Rapid warming in the geologic past, long before there were humans, led to mass extinctions. And times when it was only slightly warmer than now, like before the last ice age, had sea levels high enough to flood most of today's coastal cities."
Fact check:
The post's depiction of Earth "4.5 billion years ago" is not supported by scientific evidence,  Tanja Bosak  , a geobiologist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, told USA TODAY.
When and how Earth's continents emerged is a subject of active research  . However, there is no evidence that ice sheet-covered continents existed 4.5 billion years ago, Bosak said.
USA TODAY reached out to the Facebook user who shared the post for comment but did not immediately receive a response.


OUR FACT-CHECK SOURCES
-  Tanja Bosak  , Jan. 26, Email exchange with USA TODAY
-  Taylor Perron  , Jan. 26, Email exchange with USA TODAY
-  The Conversation, July 21, 2020,  John Tyndall: the forgotten co-founder of climate science
-  University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, accessed Jan. 28,  History of Climate Change Interactive Timeline
-  USA TODAY, Dec. 20, 2023,  How we know humans are causing warming: A brief history of climate science | Fact check
-  USA TODAY, Jan. 20, 2023,  Fact check: Global warming caused by greenhouse gas emissions, not mysterious ocean warming
-  USA TODAY, Nov. 22, 2022,  Fact check: Earth's warming well documented, other planets' climate data limited
-  NASA, April 20, 2020,  Ice-Albedo Feedback in the Arctic
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Jan. 28,  Carbon dioxide
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Jan. 28,  Ocean warming
-  National Geographic, accessed Jan. 28,  How Did Scientists Calculate the Age of Earth?
-  NOAA, Oct. 12, 2022,  How do we know the build-up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is caused by humans?
-  Quanta Magazine, July 21, 2020,  How Earth’s Climate Changes Naturally (and Why Things Are Different Now)
-  UIC Today, Aug. 5, 2024,  New model refutes leading theory on how Earth’s continents formed


Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can  subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here  .
USA TODAY is a  verified signatory  of the International Fact-Checking Network, which requires a demonstrated commitment to nonpartisanship, fairness and transparency. Our fact-check work is supported in part by a  grant from Meta  .




https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/factcheck/2025/01/30/climate-change-caused-by-humans-fact-check/77959793007/


USA today 2 


THE CLAIM: STUDY SHOWS GLOBAL WARMING IS A 'HOAX'
A Sept. 21 Facebook post (  direct link  ,  archive link  ) shows a  Washington Post headline  that reads, "Scientists have captured Earth’s climate over the last 485 million years. Here’s the surprising place we stand now." The post includes a graph that shows Earth is currently cooler than it has been for most of the last 485 million years.
"Global warming is a hoax," reads the post's caption.
The post was shared more than 70 times in a month.


OUR RATING: FALSE
The study in question states Earth has been warmer than it is now for most of the last 485 million years. But rather than showing global warming is a "hoax," the paper reports modern global warming is proceeding at an unprecedented rate.


A WARM PAST DOESN'T DISPROVE MODERN GLOBAL WARMING
The  scientific paper  covered by The Washington Post was published in the journal Science in September examining Earth's temperature trends across the last 485 million years. Its authors – including lead author  Emily Judd  , a paleoclimate researcher at the Smithsonian Natural History Museum – combined fossilized evidence and climate models to determine global temperatures have been much warmer in the past.
However, rather than demonstrating that modern global warming is a "hoax," the study states that modern temperatures are warming more rapidly than at any other point in the study period. It also states that warmer temperatures are correlated with higher atmospheric CO2 levels throughout the study period − an observation that is consistent with  the enormous body of research that shows modern global warming is driven by CO2.
"I’ve seen quite a bit of misinformation crop up surrounding our paper, particularly the claim that we − humans − have nothing to worry about, with respect to climate change, since the Earth has been warmer for much of the last half-billion years," Judd told USA TODAY. "I cannot stress enough how reductive and problematic this viewpoint is."
The geologic record shows that when global temperatures change slowly, organisms can keep up by evolving, adapting or migrating, she said. But "when CO2 and temperatures change rapidly, as is happening today due to (emissions generated by humans), evolution can’t keep pace with the environmental change."
This leads to  mass extinction events  such as the  end-Permian extinction  around 250 million years ago, when roughly 90% of Earth's species disappeared. Modern climate change is proceeding more rapidly than the change that drove this event,  according to Judd's findings  .


ABUNDANT EVIDENCE SHOWS THAT HUMANS ARE CHANGING EARTH'S CLIMATE
Earth's average temperature has warmed 2.45 degrees since the late 1800s  due to the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation  and other human activities,  according to NASA  . This modern warming trend has been documented by  multiple independent climate agencies  .
The fact that humans are causing modern global warming has been substantiated by a large body of research, including the 2021  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report  ,  which incorporated nearly 13,000  peer-reviewed papers  and other resources −  reflecting the work of around 39,000 researchers  .
The consequences of this warming include:
-  Arctic sea ice loss
-  An increase in the frequency of  heat waves
-  Melting ice sheets in  Antarctica and Greenland
-  Melting glaciers
-  Sea level rise
-  Changes in the  ranges  of  animal species
-  Changing precipitation patterns
-  Shrinking snowpack  in the western U.S.
-  Changing  plant bloom times
-  An increase  in  flooding events  due to  sea level rise


Fact check  :
These changes are  already  impacting  human  populations  around  the  world  , Judd said.
"To minimize the consequences of (modern) climate change by misrepresenting our findings is to dismiss the very real suffering of our fellow humans," she added.
When reached by USA TODAY, the social media user who shared the post said Earth's climate has changed in the past and that their statement was "about opening discussions and being thought-provoking."


OUR FACT-CHECK SOURCES:
-  Emily Judd  , Oct. 15, Email exchange with USA TODAY
-  Daniel Stolte  , Oct. Oct. 14, Email exchange with USA TODAY
-  The Washington Post, Sept. 19,  Scientists have captured Earth’s climate over the last 485 million years. Here’s the surprising place we stand now
-  USA TODAY, Oct. 31, 2023,  False claim 'climate crisis hoax' statement signed by thousands of scientists | Fact check
-  Science, Sept. 20,  A 485-million-year history of Earth’s surface temperature
-  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report, 2021,  Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis
-  Carbon Brief, March 16,  Guest post: What 13,500 citations reveal about the IPCC’s climate science report
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 11,  Ice sheets
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 11,  Sea level
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 11,  Methane
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 11,  Carbon dioxide
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 11,  Arctic Sea Ice Minimum Extent
-  Environmental Protection Agency, July 2022,  Climate Change Indicators: Heat Waves
-  Environmental Protection Agency, February 2023,  Climate Change Indicators: Marine Species Distribution
-  Environmental Protection Agency, July 2022,  Climate Change Indicators: Snowpack
-  Environmental Protection Agency, September 2023,  Climate Change Indicators: Coastal Flooding
-  Environmental Protection Agency, April 2021,  Climate Change Indicators: Leaf and Bloom Dates
-  Environmental Protection Agency, July 2022,  Community Connection: Ice Breakup in Three Alaskan Rivers
-  Environmental Protection Agency, August 2016,  Climate Change Indicators: Glaciers
-  Environmental Protection Agency, May 2014,  Climate Change Indicators: Bird Wintering Ranges
-  Grist, Oct. 2,  Climate change is destroying American homes. Who should have to move?
-  United Nations, accessed Oct. 28,  Five ways the climate crisis impacts human security
-  The U.N. Refugee Agency, accessed Oct. 28,  Climate change and displacement
-  AP News, Oct. 11,  Climate change gave significant boost to Milton’s destructive rain, winds, scientists say
-  CDC, March 21,  Climate and Infectious Diseases
-  BBC, March 18,  Climate change is fuelling the US insurance problem


Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can  subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here  .
USA TODAY is a  verified signatory  of the International Fact-Checking Network, which requires a demonstrated commitment to nonpartisanship, fairness and transparency. Our fact-check work is supported in part by a  grant from Meta  .


https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/factcheck/2024/10/29/study-485-million-years-warming-hoax-fact-check/75697535007/


USA today 3 
THE CLAIM: ATLANTIC OCEAN COOLING SHOWS CLIMATE CHANGE IS A 'LIE'
An Aug. 26 Instagram post (  direct link  ,  archive link  ) shows a headline attributed to  New Scientist  that reads, "The Atlantic Ocean is Cooling at Record Pace, and Nobody Knows Why."
The post also shows a meme with a nervous-looking person it labels as "climate warriors caught in a lie." The post's caption includes the hashtag "#GlobalWarming."
The post garnered more than 7,000 likes in more than two weeks.


OUR RATING: FALSE
The New Scientist article referenced in the post reported that seasonal cooling in part of the Atlantic Ocean occurred more rapidly this year. However, this event does not change the overall long-term warming trend in Earth's atmosphere and oceans due to increasing atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations, according to researchers.


EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE AND OCEANS ARE WARMING, DESPITE SEASONAL COOLING EVENT IN ATLANTIC
The vast majority of global warming has occurred in the ocean, according to  NASA  . But ocean temperatures still fluctuate.
Researchers told USA TODAY that, while it  proceeded more rapidly  than usual this year, cooling in the Atlantic Ocean around the equator is an expected seasonal event.
"It is part of the normal seasonal variation in this region,"  Michael McPhaden  , a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration oceanographer, told USA TODAY in an email. "This year the cooling happened unusually fast for reasons we do not quite understand yet."
While the rate of seasonal cooling was relatively quick this year, it does not mean that climate change isn't happening or has stopped somehow, according to  Franz Tuchen  , a NOAA oceanographer.
"Short-term ups and downs on top of the long-term warming trend are not unusual," Tuchen told USA TODAY in an email. "However, this will not prevent the overall warming trend from continuing."
:
McPhaden agreed and emphasized that the rapid cooling is not permanent and only occurred in one part of the Atlantic Ocean − a  body of water he says has warmed overall  .
"The rapid drop in temperature that we have observed covers a relatively small part of the ocean near the equator and it is already moderating," he said. "Typically, these equatorial Atlantic cooling events last only about three months before they disappear. The cooling from early this year to the present is a natural cycle that we see every year, sometimes stronger − like this year − sometimes weaker."
McPhaden said the fact that it was stronger this year "does not even remotely constitute a refutation of the  reality of human-caused climate change  ."
"It's important to understand the simple physics between  rising concentrations of heat-trapping greenhouse gases  in the atmosphere and  rising global mean surface temperatures  ,  melting glaciers  and  ice caps  ,  disappearing Arctic sea ice  ,  rising sea levels  , more severe tropical storms and many other real trends in the climate system that are caused by fossil fuel combustion and  deforestation  ," he said.
Both Tuchen and McPhaden are quoted in the New Scientist article.
An  archive of the New Scientist article from the day it was published  shows the headline "The Atlantic is cooling at record speed and nobody knows why." This is slightly different wording than the headline shown in the social media post, which reads "The Atlantic Ocean is Cooling at Record Pace, and Nobody Knows Why."
A few days after publication, New Scientist  changed the article's headline  to "Part of the Atlantic is cooling at record speed and nobody knows why."
USA TODAY reached out to the Instagram user who shared the post for comment but did not receive a response.
AFP  debunked a similar claim.


OUR FACT-CHECK SOURCES:
-  Michael McPhaden  , Sept. 10, Email exchange with USA TODAY
-  Franz Tuchen  , Sept. 9, Email exchange with USA TODAY
-  Pedro DiNezio  , Sept. 10, Phone interview with USA TODAY
-  Carbon Brief, April 28, 2021,  Melting glaciers drove ‘21% of sea level rise’ over past two decades
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Causes
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Ocean warming
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Ice sheets
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Sea level
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Arctic Sea Ice Minimum Extent
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Carbon dioxide
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed Sept. 10,  Arctic Sea Ice Minimum Extent
-  NASA Vital Signs of the Planet, accessed accessed Sept. 10,  Global temperature
-  Environmental Health News, Jan. 19, 2021,  The push for standing forest protections in US climate policy
-  Copernicus, accessed Sept. 10,  Global Ocean Sea Surface Temperature trend map from Observations Reprocessing


Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can  subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here  .
USA TODAY is a  verified signatory  of the International Fact-Checking Network, which requires a demonstrated commitment to nonpartisanship, fairness and transparency. Our fact-check work is supported in part by a  grant from Meta  .


https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/factcheck/2024/09/12/atlantic-ocean-cooling-climate-change-fact-check/75138791007/


USA today 4
Confirmed: Global floods, droughts worsening with warming


Political misinformation continues to swirl around the climate change discussion like a thick fog rolling in off the rising ocean. But a host of government documents and reports by researchers and historians lay a clear trail of what scientists and government officials knew and when.
Scientists had already figured out by the late 1800s that a greenhouse effect works to keep the planet warm, and that the carbon dioxide produced by burning coal could enhance that effect. By the 1970s, researchers were measuring those emissions in the atmosphere and warning Earth’s temperature could warm between 0.5 and 5 degrees Celsius by the mid-21st century.
Fifty years later, the vast majority of scientists agreed the global average temperature was already one degree Celsius higher than it had been in the late 1800s and had been rising at a rate of .2 degrees Celsius every decade since the 1970s.


SOME PEOPLE CONTINUE TO WRONGLY CHARACTERIZE CLIMATE CHANGE AS A NEW FAD
Despite the long history of scientific and military documents that chronicle warming temperatures, rising sea levels and more extreme weather around the world, people often repeat misconceptions and share inaccurate information.
In one of the latest examples, presidential contender Ron DeSantis, governor of  one of the states most vulnerable to climate change  , brought up warming during a May 24 FOX News interview with Trey Gowdy.
When Gowdy asked about the U.S. military, DeSantis replied:
“  You talk about things like global  warming that they’re somehow concerned about, and that’s not the military I served in.”
But the military, including the Navy, has been  worried about climate change for decades  .
“DeSantis is wrong,” says Peter Gleick, a co-founder and senior fellow at the Pacific Institute, who has studied the  U.S. military’s climate change research for more than 30 years  .
Navy officials talked about the impacts of climate change more than 15 years before DeSantis joined the Navy in 2004.
-  “We are all aware of possible threats posed by global climate change,” retired Navy Admiral James Watkins told members of Congress in February 1989, after being nominated by President George H.W. Bush to serve as Secretary of Energy.
-  By 2001, Navy submarines had documented a “striking” thinning of new Arctic Ocean ice.
-  The Navy conducted a two-day symposium  in 2001 to evaluate potential operations needed in an ice-diminished Arctic.
-  The Navy issued its “Climate Change Road Map  ” in 2010, the year DeSantis left active duty. It stated: “Climate change is a national security challenge with strategic implications for the Navy.”


WHAT WE KNEW AND WHEN ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE
For more than 150 years, scientists have built on the work of others before them to identify the role of carbon dioxide emissions in warming the Earth.
“Any politician today that denies the reality of climate change is either grossly ignorant of more than a century of science or is deliberately misleading the public for political reasons,” Gleick said.
Read on to explore more about the roots of climate change research and the information scientists have learned and when:


CONCERNS ABOUT COAL BURNING CROP UP EARLY
1300s  – King Edward of England bans coal burning, blaming it for thick, black smoke choking the air in London.
1700s  – Coal-powered factories begin appearing in Great Britain as the first Industrial Revolution begins in Europe.
1824 –  Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier, a mathematician and physicist in France, theorizes that certain gases in the atmosphere could trap heat from the sun.
185  0s –  Eunice Foote, an American scientist, demonstrates the ability of water vapor and carbon dioxide  to affect solar heating, according to the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate.gov website.
1861 –  Irish physicist John Tyndall writes that  water vapor and gasses such as carbon dioxide create the Earth’s greenhouse effect  , trapping the Sun’s heat and keeping the planet warm.
1896 –  Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius  publishes a study that shows he “knows that increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will raise temperatures, and acknowledges that burning fossil fuels are a source of carbon dioxide, but stops just short of explicitly predicting man-made global warming,” said Robert Rohde, lead scientist for Berkeley Earth. Arrhenius connected the dots in his later work.
U.S. geologist Thomas Chamberlin  at the University of Chicago, who studied glaciers in the Arctic, also writes about carbon dioxide’s role in regulating the Earth’s temperature.
1912  – A New Zealand newspaper warns burning coal could eventually change the climate. The piece was based on a  Popular Mechanics magazine article published earlier that year  that mentioned the work of Arrhenius.


CLIMATE CHANGE CONVERSATION CONTINUES AS RESEARCH ADVANCES
The era from the 1950s to the 1970s ushers in more scientific progress and data collection.
1958 –  Scientist C. David Keeling with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography begins direct measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii. In the 65 years since then,  carbon dioxide concentrations have climbed from 315.98 parts per million  to 423.78, a 34% increase.
1970  – Meteorologist George S. Benton at Johns Hopkins University writes "  Carbon Dioxide and its Role in Climate Change  " for the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. He says:
-  A 10% increase in carbon dioxide should result in an average temperature increase of about .3 degrees Celsius.
-  Some local temperatures have warmed as much as 3-4 degrees Celsius.


1974  – The Central Intelligence Agency publishes the report  “A Study of  Climatological Research as it Pertains to Intelligence Problems.”  The agency notes detrimental global climatic change and calls for more federally funded research, saying: “It is increasingly evident that the intelligence community must understand the magnitude of international threats which occur as a function of climatic change.”
1975  – Geochemist Wallace Broecker of Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory publishes a study titled: "  Climatic Change: Are We on the Brink of a Pronounced Global Warming  ?"


RESEARCH ADVANCES OPEN INFORMATION FLOODGATES DURING CARTER ADMINISTRATION
By the late 1970s, the phrase “climate change” began regularly appearing in academic research papers, government reports and even newspaper stories.
After President Jimmy Carter’s election in 1976, several key developments occur, including a panel he commissioned to look at concentrations of carbon dioxide and a study for the Department of Energy.
1977  – In  a July letter to Carter, his science adviser, geophysicist Frank Press  ,  notes:
-  Fossil fuel combustion has increased “at an exponential rate” over 100 years
-  Carbon dioxide is 12% above the pre-industrial revolution level and could grow 1.5 to 2 times that level within 60 years, increasing warning anywhere from 0.5-5 degrees Celsius
-  Rapid increase could be “catastrophic”


1978  – In one of the earliest references to climate change in the news media, Newsweek publishes a story by Peter Gwynne and Sharon Begley, during a tough winter, with heavy rain and mudslides in California.
-  The authors asked if the Earth is moving into a period of colder weather and climatologists said climate change isn’t temporary weather but what happens over decades.
-  “A growing number of meteorologists think that, rather than cooling, the atmosphere is actually warming up,” the story stated. And, "if the world is getting warmer, the main reason is a rise in the atmosphere’s level of carbon dioxide.”


July 1980 –  The Global 2000 Study Report to the President  , written by a team co-led by Martha Garrett and Gerald Barney, moves the conversation about environmental challenges fully into American politics.  Among its findings  :
-  Even a 1 degree Celsius rise would make the earth’s climate warmer than in 1,000 years
-  A carbon dioxide-induced temperature rise is expected to be 3 or 4 times greater at the poles than in the middle latitudes. (Today, federal officials say the Arctic is warming more than twice as fast as anywhere else in the world and at an even greater pace in some locations and at some times of the year.)


December 1980  – The probable outcome of the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is “beyond human experience,” reports a sweeping  study by the American Association for the Advancement of Science for the Energy Department.  The report states, that CO2-triggered climate change could:
-  Cause floods and droughts, leading to malnutrition and famine.
-  "Pit nation against nation and group against group.''


Roger Revelle, former president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, says if carbon dioxide levels doubled by mid-21st century, average global temperatures would increase by 5 degrees Fahrenheit, the Associated Press reports.
1988  – James Hansen, with NASA’s Goddard Space Institute, and George Woodwell, director of the Woods Hole Research Center, tell members of the U.S. Senate’s Energy and Natural Resources committee that  carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are rising  and responsible for increases in global average temperature and warming at higher latitudes.
1989  – The National Academy of Sciences — now led by Press, Carter's former science adviser — sends a letter to President-elect George H.W. Bush, urging him to place the threat of increasing global temperatures high on his agenda and to seek alternatives to coal, oil and other pollutants that fuel global warming.
Gleick publishes a study that notes  widespread attention to concerns about how climate change and other environmental problems could affect international security  and recommends responses to minimize adverse consequences.
1990 –  The U.S. Navy War College presents a report to the Select Senate Committee on Intelligence,  “Global Climate Change: Implications for the United States.”  in what Gleick says is the first explicit acknowledgement of the potential threat of climate change to national security.
1991  – The Bush administration’s National Security Strategy of the United States mentions the climate peril twice, saying environmental concerns such as climate change and deforestation were “already contributing to political conflict.”
1997  – Members of the  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  adopt the Kyoto Protocol in Kyoto, Japan in December. It receives 84 signatures over the next 15 months.
1998  – The federal government  declassifies data gathered by Navy submarines on Arctic sea ice thickness  , information deemed essential to examining how global climate change affects ice cover.
1999  – As the millennium closes, researchers  Michael Mann, Raymond Bradley and Malcolm Hughes reconstruct historical temperatures  and suggest warming in the latter half of the century is unlike anything in at least 1,000 years. It became widely known as the hockey stick theory, for the line that shows the abrupt increase in later years.


A NEW CENTURY
2002  – The National Academies of Science releases the report:  “Abrupt Climate Change, Inevitable Surprises.”
2003  – Abrupt climate change could pose “specific consequences to the US military,” writes retired  Navy Rear Admiral Richard Pittenger and oceanographer Robert Gagosian  in a piece for Defense Horizons. They say it “seems a useful exercise to contemplate the military ramifications of potential, abrupt climate changes."
2009  – U.S. Navy creates a Climate Change Task Force to recommend actions the Navy should take in response to  sudden changes in the Arctic marine environment  . Rear Admiral David Titley, who led the task force, later said counter arguments presented during the research “fell apart in the face of overwhelming evidence.”
By 2010, the task force  releases an “Arctic Roadmap”  and a  Navy Climate Change roadmap  . Among the statements:
-  Arctic is warming twice as fast as the rest of the globe.
-  “The current scientific consensus indicates the Arctic may experience nearly ice free summers sometime in the 2030's.”
-  Climate change is "affecting military installations and access to natural resources worldwide.”


2015  –  An Inside Climate News investigation  reports Exxon and Exxon Mobil Corp. accurately predicted human caused global warming between 1977 and 2003 but "suppressed the information"
2019  – A  Department of Defense report during the administration of President Donald Trump  says dozens of bases are experiencing climate change challenges, including rising sea levels, thawing permafrost, drought and wildfires.
2021  –  Department of Defense risk analysis  warns “to keep the nation secure, we must tackle the existential threat of climate change  . The unprecedented scale of wildfires, floods, droughts, typhoons, and other extreme weather events  of recent months and years have damaged our installations and bases, constrained force readiness and operations, and contributed to instability around the world.”
In June 2023, Titley, the retired rear admiral who led the Navy's 2009-10 task force, told USA TODAY the military is "always interested in changes (political, economic, demographic, agricultural, engineering, technology, etc) that will impact war fighting, readiness, and the capabilities of both ourselves and any potential adversaries."
When people asked him why the military would be interested in climate change, Titley said he responded with his own question. “Why wouldn’t we be if it impacting warfighting and readiness? It would be negligent and a disservice of our Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Marines not to think through the changes that will be caused by a changing climate."




https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2023/06/10/timeline-of-climate-change-what-humanity-knew-and-when/70273996007/


National post canada 1 
CONFIRMED: GLOBAL FLOODS, DROUGHTS WORSENING WITH WARMING


ARTICLE CONTENT
The intensity of extreme drought and rainfall has “sharply” increased over the past 20 years, according to a study published Monday in the journal Nature Water. These aren’t merely tough weather events, they are leading to extremes such as crop failure, infrastructure damage, even humanitarian crises and conflict.
The big picture on water comes from data from a pair of satellites known as GRACE, or Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment, that were used to measure changes in Earth’s water storage — the sum of all the water on and in the land, including groundwater, surface water, ice, and snow.
Advertisement 2


Story continues below


This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.


Article content


“It’s incredible that we can now monitor the pulse of continental water from outer space,” said Park Williams, a bioclimatologist at the University of California, Los Angeles who was not involved with the study.
“I have a feeling when future generations look back and try to determine when humanity really began understanding the planet as a whole, this will be one of the studies highlighted,” he said.
The researchers say the data confirms that both frequency and intensity of rainfall and droughts are increasing due to burning fossil fuels and other human activity that releases greenhouse gases.
“I was surprised to see how well correlated the global intensity was with global mean temperatures,” said Matthew Rodell, study author and deputy director of Earth sciences for hydrosphere, biosphere, and geophysics at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
The strong link between these climate extremes and rising global average temperatures means continued global warming will mean more drought and rainstorms that are worse by many measures — more frequent, more severe, longer and larger.
Advertisement 3


Story continues below


This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.


Article content


Researchers looked at 1,056 events from 2002-2021 using a novel algorithm that identifies where the land is much wetter or drier than normal.
That showed the most extreme rains keep happening in sub-Saharan Africa, at least through December 2021, the end of the data. The rainfall extremes also took place in central and eastern North America from 2018-2021, and Australia during 2011-2012.
The most intense droughts were a record-breaking one in northeastern South America from 2015-2016; an event in the Cerrado region of Brazil that began in 2019 and continues; and the ongoing drought in the American Southwest that has caused dangerously low water levels in two of the biggest U.S. reservoirs, Lake Mead and Lake Powell. Those remain low despite heavy rains this year.
Drought events outnumbered heavy rain events by 10%. Their geographic extents and how long they lasted were similar.
A warmer atmosphere increases the rate at which water evaporates during dry periods. It also holds more water vapor, which fuels heavy rainfall events.
The study noted that infrastructure like airports and sewage treatment plants that were designed to withstand once-in-a-100-year events are becoming more challenged as these extremes happen more often and with more intensity.
Advertisement 4


Story continues below


This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.


Article content


“Looking forward into the future, in terms of managing water resources and flood control, we should be anticipating that the wetter extremes will be wetter and the dry extremes will get drier,” said Richard Seager, a climate scientist at the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University, who was not involved with the study.
Seager said it’s a mistake to assume that future wet and dry extremes can be managed the same as in the past because “everything’s going to get amplified on both ends of the dry-wet spectrum.”
According to the U.S. National Integrated Drought Information System, 20% of the annual economic losses from extreme weather events in the U.S. are from floods and droughts.
A drastic swing between extreme drought and unprecedented flooding, dubbed “weather whiplash,” is becoming common in some regions.
Water stress is expected to significantly affect poor, disenfranchised communities as well as ecosystems that have been underfunded and exploited.
For example, the United Nations has said that Somalia is experiencing its longest and most severe drought, an event that has caused the deaths of millions of livestock and widespread hunger. Venezuela, a country that has faced years of political and economic crises, resorted to nationwide power cuts during April 2016 as a result of the drought conditions affecting water levels of the Guri Dam.
As for solutions, using floodwaters to replenish depleted aquifers and improving the health of agricultural soil so it can absorb water better and store more carbon are just a few methods that could improve water resiliency in a warming world, the study says.
—-
Associated Press climate and environmental coverage receives support from several private foundations. See more about AP’s climate initiative here. The AP is solely responsible for all content.




https://nationalpost.com/pmn/news-pmn/confirmed-global-floods-droughts-worsening-with-warming


National post canada 2 
Is global warming helping loggerhead turtles colonize the Med?


Global carbon emissions are shooting back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic levels, new analysis has shown. Scientists said the finding is a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at the Cop26 climate summit.
The emissions driving the climate crisis reached their highest ever levels in 2019, before global coronavirus lockdowns saw them fall by 5.4%. However, fossil fuel burning has surged faster than expected in 2021, the international research team said, in stark contrast to the rapid cuts needed to tackle global heating.
The data shows world leaders have failed to build back greener, with just a small proportion of pandemic spending going to sustainable sectors. But the scientists said hopes of keeping global heating to 1.5C remain alive if Cop26 leads to rapid global action.
The Global Carbon Project (GCP) report shows emissions from coal and gas jumping this year by more than they fell in 2020. Oil use is also rising in 2021, but more slowly because transport activity remains below normal.
Unlike most countries, emissions in the world’s biggest polluter, China, actually rose slightly during the pandemic in 2020 and are expected to rise another 4% in 2021. India has very low emissions per person but will see CO2 rise 12.6% in 2021, almost double the fall in 2020.
The US and EU27 will also see sharp rises of 7.6% in 2021, but remain on a longer term trend of slowly declining emissions. Renewables were the only energy source that continued to grow during the pandemic.
The scientists said 2022 could set a new record for global emissions, depending on whether the expected increased in oil consumption, as travel recovers further, is offset by reversal of the surge in coal burning seen in 2021.
The world’s “carbon budget” is the total emissions allowed to retain a 50% chance of keeping global temperature rise below 1.5C, but analysis shows this will be blown in 11 years if the current rate of emissions continues.
“What is surprising is that [the rebound in emissions] happened so quickly, in spite of the fact that much of the global economy has not yet recovered,” said Prof Corinne Le Quéré, at the University of East Anglia, UK, and one of the analysis team. “This is really a reality check.”
“However, we do not yet see the effect of the climate policy decisions that will be taken at Cop26 in Glasgow, which could be really a gamechanger,” she said. “1.5C is still alive. The decrease in emissions needed is very large indeed, but feasible with concerted action.”
Glen Peters, at the Centre for International Climate Research in Oslo, Norway, said: “Many of us were [expecting] a recovery spread out over a few years, as opposed to a big hit in 2021.” He said Covid recovery funding had been too “dirty”, with not enough low-carbon investment. “If we continue on the current trajectory, then that may push emissions in 2022 up.”
Prof Pierre Friedlingstein, at the University of Exeter, UK, said: “To achieve net zero by 2050, we must cut emissions every year by an amount comparable to that seen during Covid. This highlights the scale of the action that is now required, and the importance of Cop26.”
The 196 nations at the Cop26 summit are charged with pushing national pledges to cut emissions towards that needed for 1.5C, with India’s new commitment to net zero a notable advance. But the $100bn promised by rich nations to poorer nations has yet to be delivered. Voluntary international pacts to end deforestation, cut methane emissions and make green technology the cheapest option have been announced. But global heating will only stop when emissions reach net zero.
The GCP report was produced by almost 100 scientists from 70 organisations across the world and, based on the figures to date, calculated that CO2 emissions from fossil fuels will rise by between 4.1% and 5.7% in 2021, compared with a fall of 5.4% in 2020. That fall is bigger than seen after the global financial crisis in 2008 (1.2%) and the collapse of the Soviet Union (3.1%).
Emissions will have to be reduced by even greater amounts to hit net zero by 2050. But Le Quéré said: “We know what to do: move out of coal, electrify transport, and reforest.” She said a quarter of emissions come from countries that had been steadily decreasing emissions while growing their economies, including the UK, Germany, the US, Japan and Mexico.
“The key message is to resist the temptation to be discouraged by our latest findings,” she said. “The commitments being put in place at Cop26 are really important. It’s important that the countries agree on what they’re going to do and then, of course, plan for immediate implementation.”
The surge in emissions in 2021 resulted from Covid recovery packages largely funding existing, polluting industries including steel, cement and construction, particularly in China, Peters said: “China is, on the one hand, making extremely good progress, deploying solar and wind and electric vehicles. On the other hand, its economic recovery packages tend to go back to the old way of doing things. But there’s another 70% of global emissions that are not from China as well.”
Whether 2022 sees a new record for global emissions depends on whether the burst of coal burning seen during the pandemic recovery was a temporary “sugar hit” or continues, he said.




https://nationalpost.com/pmn/environment-pmn/is-global-warming-helping-loggerhead-turtles-colonize-the-med




National post canada 3 
Human activity and climate change cause cascading effects for Arctic ecosystem
It doesn’t end up on dinner plates and it lacks the popular appeal of whales and dolphins, but scientists warn that a small fish that is critical to Arctic marine life could be in trouble from climate change and human activity.
Maxime Geoffroy, a researcher at the Fisheries and Marine Institute of Memorial University of Newfoundland, said the fate of the Arctic cod — also known as the polar cod — has a ripple effect on animals such as beluga and bowhead whales and ringed seals.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS
Enjoy the latest local, national and international news.
Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events.
Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account.
National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.
Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.
Support local journalism.
SUBSCRIBE FOR MORE ARTICLES
Enjoy the latest local, national and international news.
Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events.
Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account.
National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.
Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.
Support local journalism.
REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Access articles from across Canada with one account.
Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.
Enjoy additional articles per month.
Get email updates from your favourite authors.
THIS ARTICLE IS FREE TO READ REGISTER TO UNLOCK.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Access articles from across Canada with one account
Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments
Enjoy additional articles per month
Get email updates from your favourite authors
“Polar bears for instance, which are one of these charismatic Arctic animals, they feed on seals that rely on Arctic cod. So it’s not a direct impact on polar bears, but it will have a detrimental impact,” Geoffroy said in an interview.
“Tourists are not coming to the Arctic to see the Arctic cod, but they are coming to see the predators that are feeding on polar cod. It will have a cascading impact on the whole Arctic ecosystem as we know it.”
Geoffroy and a consortium of dozens of international scientists sounded the alarm on the fate of the fish in a scientific review published this month in the journal Elementa.
Changing weather conditions are causing habitat loss, disrupting reproduction, hampering food availability for larvae and juveniles and leading to increased predation as some species migrate north to escape warming waters, he said.
The Arctic cod is not fished commercially but it is the most abundant forage fish in the Arctic seas, providing a key food source for other marine life. It spends its early life close to ice-covered and open water surfaces eating zooplankton, while adults seek out ocean depths of up to 100 metres. It belongs to the Atlantic cod family and measures less than 25 centimetres with a lifespan of under seven years.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
There are a few other larger species of fish found close to the Arctic floor, but they are not as plentiful, and most of them also feed on the Arctic cod, Geoffroy added.
Models show that warming waters could decrease the population by 17 per cent by 2050, he said, which could mean a significant loss of food for about half of the animals that depend on the cod, he said.
The cod eggs do best at sea temperatures around freezing, while larvae tolerate up to 2 C. Anything warmer is “detrimental” to the animal, he said. Some parts of the Arctic Ocean are seeing temperatures near the surface, where most young Arctic cod live, above 2 C, he said.
“But it’s not dire everywhere,” he pointed out.
The Arctic cod is at its outer limit of tolerance along the southern boundary of its range — in the Bering, Labrador, and Barents seas, he said. But it is in comfortable conditions in the High Arctic, such as the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, the Siberian Arctic, and the Arctic Basin, he said.
Most of the planet is covered by oceans, which have absorbed 90 per cent of the recent warming caused by planet-warming gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. Global sea surface temperatures have been at record highs since April, meteorologists report as climate change is linked to more extreme and deadly events.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Newly published data from the Copernicus Climate Change Service documented “exceptionally warm” ocean temperatures in the North Atlantic with “extreme” marine heat waves near Ireland, the U.K., and in the Baltic Sea.
Compounding the effects of climate change is human activity. “I think what we saw was that the main risk was really from oil pollution, rather than fisheries,” Geoffroy said.
Young Arctic cod exposed to crude oil show reduced survival and growth as well as greater deformities, he said.
And without enough healthy species to carry on, he said the food web could be in trouble. He likened the Arctic cod to a “key piece of the Arctic puzzle,” which if removed would leave a significant hole. “The cascading impacts, again, they will have an impact on the whole ecosystem.”
This report by The Canadian Press was first published Aug. 17, 2023.
https://nationalpost.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/human-activity-and-climate-change-cause-cascading-effects-for-arctic-ecosystem


National post canada 4 


Loss of Arctic summer sea ice 'now inevitable' by 2050, climate conference hears
The loss, expected to happen at least once by 2050, spells the end of an entire ecosystem that has evolved for year-round ice cover
Author of the article:
Ships are framed by pieces of melting sea ice in Frobisher Bay in Iqaluit, Nunavut on Wednesday, July 31, 2019.
Photo by Sean Kilpatrick/The Canadian Press/File
A new report from dozens of international scientists says it’s inevitable the Arctic will lose its entire summer sea cover at least once over the next generation and probably a lot more often than that.
“It’s a threshold tipped,” said Pamela Pearson, one of the main editors of the State of the Cryosphere report delivered Monday at the COP27 climate conference in Egypt.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS
Enjoy the latest local, national and international news.
Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events.
Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account.
National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.
Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.
Support local journalism.
SUBSCRIBE FOR MORE ARTICLES
Enjoy the latest local, national and international news.
Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events.
Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account.
National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.
Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.
Support local journalism.
REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Access articles from across Canada with one account.
Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.
Enjoy additional articles per month.
Get email updates from your favourite authors.
THIS ARTICLE IS FREE TO READ REGISTER TO UNLOCK.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Access articles from across Canada with one account
Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments
Enjoy additional articles per month
Get email updates from your favourite authors
“Loss of summer sea ice is now inevitable.”
The loss, expected to happen at least once by 2050, spells the end of an entire ecosystem that has evolved for year-round ice cover. Its other effects, from disrupted weather around the globe to rising sea levels and ocean acidification, are barely beginning to be understood, Pearson said.
“The consequences are unpredictable. We don’t know how the system will respond.”
The authors draw on the growing convergence of ice sheet models and research into Earth’s ancient climate. That convergence points to what paleoclimatologists have warned for decades — that ice loss and irreversible sea-level rise may be occurring faster and at lower temperatures than previously forecast.
The report concludes that even with 1.5 C of warming — the current target — the Arctic will occasionally be entirely open on some years. At 1.7 C, that condition would be common by the end of the melt season. At 2 C, ice would be gone from July through October.
The consequences are likely to be dire for Arctic plants and animals. Animals such as polar bears and walruses hunt from sea ice and the tiny creatures that form the base of the Arctic food web hang from it.
Get a dash of perspective along with the trending news of the day in a very readable format.
By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc.
A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder.
The next issue of NP Posted will soon be in your inbox.
We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
“It’s the coral reef of the Arctic,” said Pearson, director of the International Cryosphere Climate Initiative.
Certain populations coping with a warming Arctic better than expected
Canada's last fully intact Arctic ice shelf collapses
Inuit and other northerners from across Canada depend on that ecosystem for food.
However, they aren’t the only ones likely to be affected by the loss.
Most scientists now believe shrinking sea ice is connected to extreme weather events such as floods, as well as slow-motion climate disasters such droughts, Pearson said.
As well, the acidification of the Arctic Ocean is likely to speed up. That phenomenon, caused when oceans absorb more carbon dioxide from an atmosphere where its levels are enriched, is already having an effect on shellfish.
Warmer northern seas are likely to increase the amount of methane — a potent greenhouse gas — being released from melting permafrost.
They will also likely speed up the melting of the Greenland ice cap, the report says. Even at 1.5 C of warming, sea levels are likely to rise at least a metre over the coming century.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
The warning signs are there, Pearson said.
It rained in Antarctica last March, when temperatures were 40 C above normal. Melting of the Greenland ice cap spiked in September for the first time ever. The Alps lost more than five per cent of their glacial ice in a single summer.
As the COP 27 conference gears up, Pearson said international leaders have a lot of work ahead of them.
Many countries have pledged to be carbon-neutral by 2050, but she points out that means they must halve their carbon emissions by 2030.
“We’re not seeing that yet in reality. A lot of those pledges are really vague. There’s no country in the world that is on track to halve their emissions.”
Time to get to work, Pearson suggested.
“The ice doesn’t care about your pledges.”
This report by The Canadian Press was first published Nov. 7, 2022.
                
https://nationalpost.com/news/climate-conference-hears-loss-of-arctic-summer-sea-ice-now-inevitable-by-2050


Cbc news 1 
Provinces need to do more to cut emissions, feds say, while announcing Canada's new 2035 climate target
New emissions target will guide climate action over next decade
              
Science
Canada will cut carbon emissions 45 to 50 per cent below 2005 levels by 2035, the federal government announced today, signaling a small advance over the current target but falling short of what a key group of climate experts had recommended to the government.
New emissions target will guide climate action over next decade
Minister of Environment and Climate Change Steven Guilbeault announced Canada's new 2035 emissions target on Thursday.
(Adrian Wyld/The Canadian Press)
Canada will cut carbon emissions 45 to 50 per cent below 2005 levels by 2035, the federal government announced today, signalling a small advance over the current target but falling short of what a key group of climate experts had
recommended
to the government.
Put more simply, Canada will have to slash carbon emissions by at least 41 per cent in the next 10 years. The new target for the 2035 milestone year will be followed by a multi-year consultation process to craft a plan to reach the target, guiding climate policy for the next decade.
"We chose a target which we felt was both ambitious but achievable. I want to be as ambitious as Canada can possibly be, but the federal government can't do it alone," said Steven Guilbeault, Canada's minister of environment and climate change.
"If we could work constructively with provinces across the country, then Canada will be able to do much more much, much faster."
Canada should slash carbon emissions by up to 55 per cent, says climate advisory body
The world is aiming for net-zero emissions by 2050. Here's what that means
Canada's
climate laws
require the government to set new targets every five years, and it is also part of the country's obligations under the United Nations convention that guides international climate action.
The governing Liberals passed the landmark Net-Zero Emissions Accountability Act in 2021 to require the government to release targets — and plans to achieve them — in a bid to enshrine Canadian climate action into law. The same legislation also created the Net-Zero Advisory Body, an independent group of experts that would advise the government on emissions targets and the best ways to achieve those reductions.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Minister of Environment and Climate Change Steven Guilbeault are seen at a press conference at the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow, Scotland, in 2021.
(Sean Kilpatrick/The Canadian Press)
Ottawa wants provinces to step up
Earlier this year, those experts recommended Canada cut emissions 50 to 55 per cent below 2005 levels by 2035. The new target the government has announced is less ambitious than that.
Guilbeault says his department's internal analysis suggests emission reductions greater than 50 per cent are possible, but unlikely without provincial co-operation — and the Liberals have struggled in recent years to get reticent provincial premiers on board.
"Let's be very honest with each other: some provinces are refusing to act on climate change, [to] even recognize that climate change is a problem," Guilbeault said.
"I'm hoping that over time, in the coming years, this will change and we will be in a different space. But right now, this is the political environment."
Wind turbines are seen with the Rocky Mountains in the background near Pincher Creek, Alta. The new emissions targets help drive business certainty and investment in clean technologies, experts say.
(Jeff McIntosh/The Canadian Press)
Major emitting provinces such as Alberta, Saskatchewan and Ontario have challenged federal climate action in court, especially carbon pricing  — although the carbon pricing system has survived and is in place across the country.
Alberta is now trying to
oppose
Ottawa's proposed cap on emissions from the oil and gas sector, which is a major — and growing — source of emissions.
Finding right balance while setting target
Under the 2015 Paris Agreement on fighting climate change, countries have to gradually build on climate action every five years in the form of new targets, called Nationally Determined Contributions. The system is designed to peer-pressure countries into greater climate ambition — a country that doesn't improve its targets risks looking like a laggard.
With its new 2035 target, Canada joins countries like the U.K. and Brazil, which have released new targets in previous weeks.
Supreme Court rules Ottawa's carbon tax is constitutional
Federal draft rules require oil and gas sector to cut emissions 35% below 2019 levels
Canada's last target, released in 2021, aimed to cut emissions 40 to 45 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030. The new target is not much of an improvement on the old one, says Catherine Abreu, a longtime Canadian climate advocate who now directs the International Climate Politics Hub, which supports organizations working on global climate negotiations.
"That momentum in the global economy toward clean energy is irreversible. And Canada is already losing out on a significant market share in the clean global economy," she said.
"With this goal, Canada is basically saying 'We're going to be less ambitious in transforming our economy than all of our major trading partners.' "
Abreu warned that without a more ambitious target, Canada may lose credibility on the world stage as other countries question its commitment to driving down emissions.
Alberta Premier Danielle Smith has challenged federal climate policies over the past few years.
(Jeff McIntosh/The Canadian Press)
Anna Kanduth, director of the 440 Megatonnes initiative at the Canadian Climate Institute, a data-driven project to track climate progress, says target-setting is about tradeoffs, with pros and cons when it comes to setting more ambitious goals.
A less ambitious goal that's more achievable could risk "delaying action into the longer term, potentially delaying investments in low-carbon transition." On the other hand, aiming for steeper emissions reductions comes with "potential challenges for the economy, for households and also might be more difficult to achieve with policy."
"I think too often we take a pass-fail approach to thinking about targets, when in reality, what matters most is those sustained deep emissions reductions on the path to 2050," Kanduth said.
"I would encourage folks to think about these as important markers along the way, as important milestones that are driving progress ... and that if we get close to those targets, I think that's still success."
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Inayat Singh covers the environment and climate change at CBC News. He is based in Toronto and has previously reported from Winnipeg. Email: inayat.singh@cbc.ca
Twitter
                
https://www.cbc.ca/news/science/emissions-climate-2035-target-1.7408514


Cbc news 2 
Five ways climate change is already affecting Canada
                    
More fire and less food, The Nature of Things has told stories of how climate change is affecting all of us.
As the summer of 2021 is showing us, Canada is getting hotter, with multiple record-breaking high temperatures.
Forest fires are heating up
“A spark can light a raging inferno,” says University of Alberta wildfire expert Mike Flannigan. Fire has always been an essential part our ecosystem, but now they are becoming more dangerous. 2017 was devastating in western Canada; British Columbia experienced its worst fire on record, almost 900,000 hectares went up in smoke. In 2016, one of the most destructive fires in the country swept through Fort McMurray, destroying nearly 2,500 buildings forcing the evacuating of 90,000 citizens. It was the costliest disaster in Canadian history.
MORE:
New Science tells Us Why Fire is a Growing Threat
Wetter winters mean more grass grows in the spring, and prolonged summers with higher temperatures intensify the fire season. Hot, dry weather turns the grass into a flammable fuel source turning our forests into a powder keg ready to burn. Flannigan describes what we’re facing, “The warmer we get, the more fire we have. The more fire we have, the more greenhouse gasses that are released. The more gasses that are released, the warmer we get. A vicious cycle.”
These fierce fires are burning deeper into the soil where most of the boreal’s carbon is locked. Jill Johnstone, University of Saskatchewan professor, says “These forests are part of the lungs of the planet. The boreal forest stores about 50% of the global carbon that is in the soil.” As fires become more intense, this carbon is released in a plume of smoke straight into the atmosphere continuing the warming cycle.
Sea ice is ‘an endangered species’
“Scientists suspect that the Arctic Ocean will be free of summer sea ice in my lifetime,” says explorer and extreme diver, Jill Heinerth. “And that inevitability may come sooner than we think. Each photo that I take [of ice] might one day be viewed in a gallery of mass extinctions.”
As the effects of global warming are felt around the world, nowhere is experiencing such drastic changes as the Far North —
the Arctic is warming faster than anywhere else on the planet
.
In June 2018, Heinerth and the
Under Thin Ice
team arrived in Ikpiarjuk (Arctic Bay), 700 km north of the Arctic Circle, to find temperatures hovering around 8 C — too warm for late spring.
In order to reach their filming location, they had to weave their snowmobiles around breaks and leads in the ice, testing the surface at points to make sure they wouldn’t fall through.
Even their camp near the floe edge had to be moved twice due to ponds of meltwater flooding their tents. “Climate change is happening; it’s easy to see it in the North,” says Heinerth. “How we address and adapt to our changing climate in the next few years will determine the future of our civilization.”
More drought means less food to eat
California, the sunshine state, has been gripped by a multi-year drought. As winters have become shorter, the snowpack has shrunk. Less snow means that come spring; less water melts into the rivers and valleys where the farmland is located.
California’s agricultural industry has been devastated. Much of North America’s produce is grown here, and many of California’s citizens are complaining that they’re exporting their precious water to feed others. Geologist Nick Eyles predicts that in the future they’ll want water from their northern neighbours, in return for fresh produce. “Water for vegetables; it may come to that,” says Eyles.
Canada’s grey jay and other wildlife in trouble
Climate change is already impacting the wildlife that lives in the boreal forest across Canada. Here’s just one example of the many species that are in trouble.
The grey jay is a plucky little bird that stays here all winter long. It uses trees — like a refrigerator — to stash morsels of food for winter. But warm winters are spoiling their larders early. By spring there’s nothing left to feed their hungry chicks.
The grey jay is a plucky little bird that stays here all winter long. It uses trees — like a refrigerator — to stash morsels of food for winter. But warm winters are spoiling their larders early. By spring there’s nothing left to feed their hungry chicks.
We have reached a tipping point — and now is the perfect time to act
Hotter summers, ocean acidification, more frequent and more deadly forest fires, rising sea levels — our planet is in trouble.
Acclaimed journalist and environmentalist George Monbiot decries the environmental exploitation over the last few decades. “We’ve lost 30 years or more … during which we could affect a gradual transition out of the destructive, extractive economy into a far more benign one,” he says. “But now, we find ourselves at the cliff edge.”
But with the COVID-19 pandemic and economies shutting down around the world for months on end, we may have the perfect opportunity to act. If the global shutdown of economies has shown us anything, says Monbiot, it’s that we actually can adapt quickly and live with dramatic change.
The pandemic has given us the opportunity to build a new world, says Monbiot, “an economy which respects the lives of future generations and doesn’t sacrifice those lives for the wealth of current generations; an economy that can be sustained without trashing our life support systems.”
And it’s time we seize the moment. “As we come out of this pandemic, we can build on that mutual aid to create the better societies that we need.”
                
https://www.cbc.ca/natureofthings/features/how-climate-change-is-already-affecting-canada


Cbc news 3
2022 was another record hot year. Experts say we must prepare for more climate-related disasters
'We will hit 1.5 degrees this century'
                    
2022 was the fifth-warmest year on record, the European-based climate service Copernicus reported on Tuesday.
It was 0.3 C above the 1991–2020 average, and 1.2 C above the pre-industrial average (1850–1900), making it the eighth consecutive year that global temperatures were more than 1 C above the pre-industrial average. NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will release their joint findings on Jan. 12, which will likely be the same ranking or similar,
as in previous years
.
The fact that it was another year in the top 10 likely isn't a surprise for most people, but experts say it's concerning that the warming trend continues even in light of a cooling phenomenon called La Nina.
"It is unusual that with La Nina, which should bring cooler temperatures, that we are right now about to be confirmed [as one of the] warmest years," said Mélie Monnerat, project manager at the University of Waterloo's Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation.
"Even if 2022 was maybe not as warm as 2021, it's still ridiculously high."
The last eight years have been the eight warmest on record.<br><br>2022 came in at number 5. <a href="https://t.co/RVhEMbvDa2">pic.twitter.com/RVhEMbvDa2</a>
&mdash;
@ScottDuncanWX
There's an ocean pattern called the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), where temperatures in a particular part of the central and eastern Pacific Ocean either warm or cool by a few degrees. When it's cooler, it's a La Nina year. When it's warmer, it's an El Nino year.
Both of these patterns have varying effects around the world, depending on where you are. But an El Nino year typically
results in a warmer annual global temperature
.
However, the past three years have been La Nina years — and also some of the warmest years on record, with effects felt across the globe and the country.
In 2021,
Lytton, B.C., recorded the highest temperature ever in Canada, at 49.6 C
. It was also almost wiped off the map following
deadly forest fires
.  And in 2022, worldwide, there were no shortage of climate disasters, including
flooding in Pakistan and Nigeria, drought in Somalia
, and
record-breaking heat waves in Europe
.
It's a reminder that, as the planet warms, we will experience more and more climate-related disasters, and we need to be better prepared, experts say.
WATCH | What we might expect from the climate in 2023:
Climate lookahead for 2023: Key issues and innovations | About That
Andrew Chang and CBC meteorologist and Planet Wonder host Johanna Wagstaffe discuss major climate moments last year, and how they may hint at what we can expect this year. Plus, a cricket taste test.
Warmest years on record
According to several climate agencies,
La Nina is expected to transition to neutral by the summer
. After that, it's possible we could transition to another El Nino, which means we could see one of the warmest years on record, perhaps beating out 2016 when the temperature was roughly 1.01 C above average.
"In our report, we cover that the last eight years have been the warmest eight years on record. Last year, we said that the last seven years have been the seven-warmest years on record," said Samantha Burgess, the deputy director of the Copernicus Climate Change Service. "The reality is that the climate that we're living in right now, our infrastructure is not fit for this purpose."
She also noted that, without La Nina in place, 2022 would have been even warmer.
If we go forward 10 or 15 years into the future, 2022 will probably be looked at as a cooler year than average
- Samantha Burgess, deputy director, Copernicus Climate Change Service
Burgess said that as greenhouse gases continue to be emitted, it's likely that the years ahead will get warmer and warmer.
"If we go forward 10 or 15 years into the future, 2022 will probably be looked at as a cooler year than average," she said.
'We will hit 1.5 degrees this century'
2023 has already
broken winter temperature records across Europe
.
The Copernicus report also noted that both CO2 emissions and methane — two of the leading contributors to global warming — increased in 2022: CO2, by 2.1 parts per million and methane by 12 parts per billion.
Annual averages of global air temperature at a height of two metres estimated change since the pre-industrial period (left-hand axis) and relative to 1991-2020 (right-hand axis), according to different datasets for 2021.
(Copernicus Climate Change Service/ECMWF)
This isn't in line with the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change's goal of
trying to limit global warming to 1.5 C by the end of the century
by rapidly cutting emissions.
"We will hit 1.5 degrees this century," Burgess said. "Worryingly, we'll probably hit it in the next decade or so."
Right now, we're at 1.2 degrees of warming above the pre-industrial average, she said, and if we do a linear extrapolation of the amount of greenhouse gases that are currently in the atmosphere, that takes us to the early 2030s.
But the point of this, she added, isn't to be alarmist. It's to reiterate how important our choices are, from the way we consume to the way we vote.
This graph shows the Copernicus Climate Change Service's current forecast for when Earth will hit 1.5 C warming above the pre-industrial average.
(Copernicus)
And just because we will hit 1.5 C doesn't mean it will be like that forever, she said, nor does it mean we shouldn't actively try to adapt or mitigate climate change.
"It's not a cliff edge," Burgess said of the 1.5 C temperature. "Every fraction of a degree matters. It matters for the types of heat waves that we have in summer, and the implications that has for vulnerable parts of our community. It matters for ecosystems, whether fish can breed or not, whether the right prey species is available in the right season for species to flourish."
'There is much work left to do'
As for Canada, Monnerat notes that the federal government has rolled out its
National Adaptation Strategy
, which aims to combat the consequences of climate change — for example,
creating new strategies as heat waves increase across the country, in places like Toronto
.
"Many of the national adaptation strategy targets have a timeframe to 2024 to 2025," she said.
That, she noted, is for the short-term — such as dealing with extreme and persistent heat waves — but with larger goals moving forward toward 2040.
WATCH |  Climate now very different from when many of us were born, scientist says:
Climate now very different from when many of us were born, scientist says
The world is not yet seeing the impact of commitments from political leaders to lower greenhouse gas emissions, says Samantha Burgess, deputy director of the Copernicus Climate Change Service. This has led to a climate today that is very different from when many of us were born, she says.
"There is much work left to do. Certain parts of Canada are warming twice as fast as the average of the rest of the planet," Monnerat said. "And then the North is triple [that]. And with the thaw of the permafrost and ice melting, these are very specific challenges that are addressed in the National Adaptation Strategy."
Hurricanes, derechos and more: Top 10 Canadian weather stories of 2022
It's warmer than normal in many parts of the North — and it's going to stay that way for awhile
Governments need to re-examine where homes are built in order to avoid impacts by flooding and wildfires, she added.
She also noted that the Intact Centre has tools for homeowners to try to prepare themselves against such things
like flooding
— which is one of the biggest and costliest consequences of climate change to homewowners in parts of Canada —
as well as wildfires
.
Meanwhile, Burgess said, as a mother, it concerns her that her son may not be able to see and enjoy the landscapes and wildlife that she herself has enjoyed. But she hasn't lost hope for the future.
"That does keep me up at night," she said. "But equally, I think I am buoyed by the optimism and the climate activism of the next generation."
                
https://www.cbc.ca/news/science/2022-global-temperature-rise-1.6708219


CBC news 4
Canada's greenhouse gas emissions climbed in 2022, after pandemic slowdown
Latest numbers show Canada is on track to meet targets, Guilbeault says
                    
News
Canada's greenhouse gas emissions rose in 2022, as the economy rebounded from the pandemic slowdown. But Environment Minister Steven Guilbeault said the numbers are a sign his government's climate policies are working, with emissions totals the lowest in 25 years aside from the pandemic years.
Latest numbers show Canada is on track to meet targets, Guilbeault says
Environment Minister Steven Guilbeault said Thursday the latest inventory report on emissions shows the federal government's climate policies are working.
(Sean Kilpatrick/The Canadian Press)
Canada's greenhouse gas emissions rose in 2022, as the economy rebounded from the pandemic slowdown, according to new figures released by the federal government.
The new National Inventory Report data shows emissions reached 708 megatonnes in that year, compared with 698 megatonnes in 2021.
But Environment Minister Steven Guilbeault said the 2022 numbers are a sign his government's climate policies are working, with emissions totals the lowest in 25 years aside from the pandemic years.
"The report shows that Canada remains on track to meet our emission-reduction goals," Guilbeault told a news conference Thursday.
"We're doing this as our country rebounds strongly from the global impact of the pandemic."
Guilbeault said the numbers show the country remains on track for its 2030 goals.
The annual report is submitted to the United Nations and details Canada's progress on its emissions reduction plan.
Oil and gas sector leading source
The oil and gas sector was once again the largest source of emissions in Canada in 2022, accounting for a little more than 30 per cent of the total.
Emissions related to the transportation sector came second, while emissions produced from the making of electricity as the country has moved away from coal-powered plants.
Patrick Bonin, a climate campaigner at Greenpeace Canada, said an increase in emissions had been expected given the economic upswing, and that "the good news is that the rebound is lower than expected."
Bonin said the figures show that regulations aimed at reducing emissions have been effective. A missing link in the current climate plan is a cap on emissions from the oil and gas sector, he said.
"The federal government must act quickly to implement the long-delayed emissions cap on this sector," added Nichole Dusyk, a senior policy advisor at the International Institute for Sustainable Development.
Last December, the Liberal government committed to capping emissions from the oil and gas industry, but not before 2026.
Additional details of the plan, and its precise timetable, are expected in the coming months.
Canada on track?
The Liberal government has committed to cutting emissions by 40 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030.
That plan calls for a 20 per cent reduction in emissions from 2005 levels by 2026 — to 586 megatonnes.
Emission projections show Canada on track to achieve interim climate target
The Trans Mountain expansion is finally pumping oil. Above ground, hope and worry linger
Projections released
by the federal government last year showed Canada was on track to reach that target, though some experts questioned whether that was the case.
The Calgary-based Pembina Institute pointed out Canada's emissions in 2022 were only seven per cent lower than 2005 levels — meaning there is still a significant amount of work to do to ensure they are 40 to 45 per cent lower than 2005 levels by 2030.
In a statement, Pembina highlighted the lagging performance of Alberta in particular, which has seen emissions rise by seven per cent since 2005.
WATCH | Oilsands emissions higher than industry reports, researchers say:
Oilsands emissions vastly higher than industry reports, scientists say
More than a dozen Alberta oilsands facilities are emitting potentially harmful air pollutants at 20 to 64 times the rate reported to the government, according to new research published in the journal Science.
Dave Sawyer, principal economist for the Canadian Climate Institute, said the results were largely positive and showed a "clear evidence that Canada continues to decouple emissions from economic growth."
In addition to oil and gas, he said improvements could be made when it comes to the building and agriculture sectors to decrease emissions.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Benjamin Shingler is a reporter based in Montreal covering environmental issues, climate policy and Quebec politics. He previously worked at The Canadian Press and the New Brunswick Telegraph-Journal.
With files from Laurence Martin
                
https://www.cbc.ca/news/climate/national-inventory-report-emissions-1.7191563


The globe and mail 1 




Author Diana Beresford-Kroeger wants you to plant a tree and save the world
In her new book, Our Green Heart, the author and renowned botanist makes the case for a collective tree-planting effort that she says could buy humanity a bit more time


                    
Diana Beresford-Kroeger wants you to plant an acorn. For decades, the Irish botanist has been doing her part, carefully planting rare trees on her property, a former sheep farm outside Merrickville, a village 70 kilometres south of Ottawa.
Where there was once rocky mud and meadow, she and her husband, Christian, have grown a forest. Over 50 years, they have planted many thousands of rare and diverse trees. Kingnut hickories grow on the south side of the orchard. A tulip tree thrives a few steps from her house. Her driveway alone is a contemplative marvel; about a kilometre of gravel passage under the flickering shade of reaching branches, until you reach a circle of 45 soaring black walnuts.
Many years back, the walnuts from her nuttery enticed a gang of Hell’s Angels to her home.
Upon hearing the rumble of motorcycles coming up the road, “I thought I’d have a bloody heart attack,” says Beresford-Kroeger, relishing this one of many tales over tea in her rustic kitchen. “But they were very polite.” They had land, they explained, with room to plant trees, and so they went home with a stash of walnuts. “They were better planners than the politicians.”
Books we're reading and loving in October: Globe readers and staff share their picks
But back to the acorn. Planting one is simple enough. And the results of a collective effort, Beresford-Kroeger argues in her new
book
Our Green Heart
, will eventually produce a harvest of grand old oaks, “a rescue crop” to save humanity from itself. This bounty would include shade and oxygen and, in fair measure, wood for shelter. But oak trees are also long-living and drought-resistant. In that acorn, they produce a source of protein. Their roots find a welcoming home in Canada. The oak, as she likes to say, is the right tree in the right place.
Reading
Our Green Heart
is like wandering through a forest with a world-renowned expert pointing out the fascinating parts you’ve missed, sprinkling the botany and chemistry with memories and reflections.
But mostly the book is an urgent plea from an elder scientist, internationally recognized for expanding the way we think about trees, who’s spent a lifetime defending something precious and knows time is growing short. To save the trees – and ourselves – we need to protect the forests we have, Beresford-Kroeger writes, and plant new ones as quickly as we can.
According to her calculations, a diverse, global forest of 50 billion trees, planted over the next six years, would stall climate change and buy humanity some time. That’s roughly equal to every person in the world planting six native trees. It means adding trees to schoolyards and backyards, farms and parks, and city streets. Those with more space, plant more. Those with money, give more. “Use your imagination,” she says. “But find a way to do it.”
Open this photo in gallery:
Supplied
Our Green Heart
, her eighth book, returns to her roots, acquainting the reader with her great-aunt Nellie, who showed her precocious niece how to live in communion with nature. Beresford-Kroeger was orphaned at 13 when her Irish mother died in a car accident, and the aristocratic British family of her estranged, deceased father declined to take her in. A sympathetic judge spared her a trip to the laundries, where she would have been put to work, and she was adopted by a bachelor uncle who lived in Cork, and who possessed a large library to indulge her curiosity. “That was the luckiest day of my life,” she says.
She spent her summers with Nellie, in the nearby valley of Lisheens. From her aunt, she learned the knowledge of Druids – the use of medicinal herbs and a spiritual understanding of nature. The community trained her in the laws and lessons of the early Celts, about the sustainable use of land, hospitality among neighbours (”Never come into a house with your hands dangling”), and an awareness of humans being bound to each other and “connected to the universe as a whole.”
This ancient wisdom continued to guide her, even as her advanced degrees in biology, chemistry and medicine, piled up. She came to Canada in 1972, working as a research scientist in the medical school of the University of Ottawa, and two years later married Christian Kroeger, a linguist and mathematician, who worked for NASA before taking a post with the federal government. For wedding gifts, friends brought peach, plum and apricot trees for an orchard, the beginnings of their forest.
They now live, surrounded by trees, in a white-pine house they built themselves – aided by a gang of rocket propulsion engineers who arrived with roofing material, and, Beresford-Kroeger says, a “helluva lot of beer.” Since the 1980s, after turning down a professorship, Beresford-Kroeger has travelled to forests around the world, conducting research, advocating for nature and collaborating with fellow scientists. But here, in the forest she created, she can be still and listen to the life growing around her.
Her latest book reflects a lifetime of keen observation, explaining the science behind a leaf while also wondering at its beauty, describing how trees seed the soil while contemplating history from a tree’s perspective.
A tree species takes 500 million years to reach “its own state of perfection,” she writes. That means half a billion years to fill the hole left when a tree seed goes extinct. “We have to wait for something new, while never fully grasping what we’ve lost.”
Open this photo in gallery:
Beresford-Kroeger's book is an urgent plea to protect the forests we have and plant new ones as quickly as we can.
So much about trees remains a mystery. In 2022, an international study published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences estimated that there are 73,300 species of trees growing on Earth, including many thousands that scientists know little about or have yet to properly identify. In
Our Green Heart,
Beresford-Kroeger
laments the reckless loss of her favourites, including the towering redwood, Sequoia sempervirens, and Australia’s giant flowering Eucalyptus regnans
,
which can grow 33 storeys high. These trees are being cut down, she writes, “before we understand how they function even though they are the largest green machine on the planet.”
This worry is driving another ambitious goal: to create a DNA library of the global forest, to preserve its diversity for future – an urgent task, she believes, that scientists and countries have so far overlooked. A genome project, she says, would allow us to restore rare trees wiped out by disease, create hardier, hybrid trees and find new medicinal properties that science has yet to discover.
“It just makes me really angry that people have been so careless with the things on which the foundations of our life rests,” Beresford-Kroeger admits, in the tone of someone weary of repeating herself.
Some of the trees on her land are so rare they may be among the last of their species. She can’t say how many trees she planted – “I didn’t count them” – but knows all their stories and what they need to thrive. On a stroll, just beyond her house, she names each one, fondly, in Latin.
There’s the honey locust (Gleditsia triacanthos), a salt- and drought-tolerant tree that grows thorny spikes from its trunk like sea urchins. On a tour, in the field of the roundabout driveway by her house, she points out the red elongated fruit and waxy leaves of the spreading cucumber tree (Magnolia acuminata),
Canada’s only magnolia species, now at risk of being lost forever. Yet here’s a tree, once tropical, that learned to live in a northern environment. “It has the history of climate change,” she says.
(Her magical forest does deliver one disappointment: Under the walnut trees, near a clothesline, Beresford-Kroeger had hoped to find the appropriately named Phallus impudicus
sprouting from the ground. No luck. “It looks exactly the same as a penis,” she explains, her Irish lilt dancing with laughter. “If you were hanging up your laundry, you’d see the whole place studded with penises.”)
Other absences are described more sorrowfully. Her most beloved tree was one of the few already growing on the land when they bought it: a massive umbrella-shaped American elm (Ulmus americana) that hosted the swinging nests of Baltimore orioles. She would admire it from her porch window, or sit under it and clear her mind. But Dutch elm disease killed the tree not long before the pandemic, despite Beresford-Kroeger’s expert efforts to save it. Only the stump remains. “It’s like losing a dog you love so much,” she says. “I am still mourning it.” That loss is also a reminder that science still knows too little about how to cure even the trees we care most about.
Open this photo in gallery:
Beresford-Kroeger points to the fruit that many species of birds eat from the Sugarberry tree (Celtis occidentalis).
Occasionally, Beresford-Kroeger will hold a plant sale for charity, or offer seedlings and seeds for free. Next spring, she hopes to have extra seeds from the cucumber tree, a rare gift for those who pass scrutiny. “They have to prove to me they’ll look after it,” she says, “and promise to never cut it down.”
Meanwhile, on her front stoop, she is “babying” two young trees, barely seven feet tall: a rare but tough white cherry from the French Alps, and the yellow version of the pawpaw, which is indigenous to Southern Ontario and produces
fruit that tastes like pineapple and mango. They will go in her cold cellar for the winter, and hopefully emerge strong enough for a permanent home in the ground come spring.
While still sprightly and sharp at 80, Beresford-Kroeger doesn’t expect be around to see them reach their full height. This is every tree grower’s fate eventually. More than a decade ago, she travelled to Japan to help plant trees that would grow deep roots to hold the soil firm against future tsunamis. Another long game. But looking down on her seedlings, knowing they would help keep people safe, felt “like winning a Nobel Prize.”
Over 50 years, Beresford-Kroeger and her husband have planted thousands of rare and diverse trees on their property.
The deed meets her definition of happiness: a generosity of spirit, in which you expect no reward. Although, as small pleasures go, a single strawberry and a spot of tea would not be refused. “I like strawberries,” she says. “And a cup of tea brings conversation.”
In this case, the conversation often returns to worry about the fate of the next generation. She is angry that we have put “the onus on them to solve a problem that we should be solving,” and vows: “I will not die without answers out there for the kids.” Even now, she has a new stack of names from her book signings; young people who came to her with questions, keen to talk more. (They can expect an old-fashioned letter; she loathes e-mail.)
She once asked a stadium of middle-school students in Texas, gathered to hear her talk about trees and climate change, if “they had ghosts in their head,” and were worried about the future. They all raised their hands. “I believe in the philosophy of the mind,” she says. When a problem makes those ghosts restless, you find a way to soothe them with action. As an example, she produces her latest correspondence from a teenager in Michigan, who, after seeking her advice, is now growing a hummingbird forest, one that includes flowering trees, trumpet vines, pines and cedars so the birds can drink nectar, preen and rest.
More generally,
Our Green Heart
recommends: “When in doubt about what to plant, look to the oaks.” To begin, seek out the grandest oak tree where you live, and visit it often. Find a black or brown acorn, ripening right about now, and remove the cup. (The best acorns, Beresford-Kroeger writes, will sink in a bucket of water.) Bury the acorn, on its side, under a half inch of soil. Add a pinch of baking soda to mask its scent from squirrels. Cover with wood chips or mulch – even this newspaper, if you have the print version in hand. And then wait. “The baby oak,” she promises, “is one of the most beautiful plants to observe.”
“Every one of us on this Earth, can do at least a little,” she says. It will help quiet the anxious ghosts in our heads. And few things, Beresford-Kroeger would say, will bring more pleasure and meaning than someday sitting under the lush and stately tree you grew to save the world.
Who is the happiest person you know?
Some people seem to approach life with a contagious measure of cheerfulness. They respond to adversity with resilience. And they appear to consistently experience joy in small, but important ways.
As part of a year-long investigation of happiness, The Globe and Mail's
Erin Anderssen
is embarking on a project to interview the "happiest people in Canada," nominated by the people who know them, through work, friendship and family.
To add a name to this list, please send a short paragraph about them and why you consider them the happiest person you know in the box below, or email it to
eanderssen@globeandmail.com
.
                


https://www.theglobeandmail.com/arts/books/article-author-diana-beresford-kroeger-wants-you-to-plant-a-tree-and-save-the/?utm_source=Shared+Article+Sent+to+User&utm_medium=LinkCopy&utm_campaign=Shared+Web+Article+Links


The globe and mail 2 


Drought in Southern Africa is behind the region’s worst hunger crisis in decades, UN says
Gerald Imray
Cape town, south africa
The Associated Press
Published October 15, 2024


                    
Open this photo in gallery:
A women scoops water from a hole she has dug in a dried up riverbed in Lusitu, Zambia, on Sept. 18.
Themba Hadebe/The Associated Press
Months of drought in Southern Africa triggered by the El Niño weather phenomenon have had a devastating impact on more than 27 million people and caused the region’s worst hunger crisis in decades, the United Nations’ food agency said Tuesday.
The World Food Program warned it could become a “full-scale human catastrophe.”
Five countries – Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia, Zambia and Zimbabwe – have declared national disasters over the drought and resultant hunger. The WFP estimates that about 21 million children in southern Africa are now malnourished as crops have failed.
Tens of millions in the region rely on small-scale agriculture that is irrigated by rain for their food and to make money to buy provisions. Aid agencies warned of a potential disaster late last year as the naturally occurring El Niño led to below-average rainfall across the region, while its impact has been exacerbated by warming temperatures linked to climate change.
“This is the worst food crisis in decades,” WFP spokesperson Tomson Phiri said. “October in southern Africa marks the start of the lean season, and each month is expected to be worse than the previous one until harvests next year in March and April. Crops have failed, livestock have perished and children are lucky to receive one meal per day.”
The five countries that declared drought-related disasters have pleaded for international aid, while Angola on the west coast of Africa and Mozambique on the east coast are also “severely affected,” Phiri said, showing the extent to which the drought has swept across the region.
“The situation is dire,” Phiri said. He said the WFP needs around $369 million to provide immediate help but has only received a fifth of that amid a shortfall in donations. The WFP has begun helping with food assistance and other critical support at the request of various governments in the region, he said.
Phiri said southern Africa’s crisis came at a time of “soaring global needs,” with humanitarian aid also desperately required in Gaza, Sudan and elsewhere.
Other aid agencies have said the drought in southern Africa is especially harsh, with the United States aid agency, USAID, saying in June it was the most severe drought in 100 years during the January to March agricultural season, wiping out swathes of crops and food for millions.
El Niño, a weather phenomenon which warms parts of the central Pacific, has different impacts on weather in different parts of the world. The latest El Niño formed in the middle of last year and ended in June. It was blamed, along with human-caused climate change and overall ocean warmth, for a wild 12 months of heat waves and extreme weather.
In southern Africa, food prices have risen sharply in many areas affected by the drought, increasing the hardship. The drought has also had other damaging effects.
Zambia has lost much of its electricity and has been plunged into hours and sometimes days of blackouts because it relies heavily on hydroelectric power from the huge Kariba Dam. The water level of the dam is so low that it can hardly generate any power. Zimbabwe shares the dam and is also experiencing power outages.
Authorities in Namibia and Zimbabwe have resorted to killing wildlife, including elephants, to provide meat for hungry people.
Scientists say sub-Saharan Africa is one of the most vulnerable parts of the world to climate change because of a high dependency on rain-fed agriculture and natural resources. Millions of African livelihoods depend on the climate, while poor countries are unable to finance climate-resilience measures.
                


https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/article-drought-in-southern-africa-is-behind-the-regions-worst-hunger-crisis/


The globe and mail 3


World News Day 2021: How newsrooms are confronting the climate crisis
                    
Sept. 28 marks the fourth annual World News Day, a global campaign to display support for journalists and highlight the critical role of fact-based journalism in making the world a better place.
This year,
World News Day 2021
will focus on the climate crisis. More than 460 news organizations across six continents have joined this year’s initiative to tell the story of how climate change is impacting the lives and livelihoods of communities around the world.
Reporting on climate change has never been more important. Over the past summer,
more than 600 people died from heat-related illnesses
in British Columbia. The town of Lytton, B.C. set a
Canadian temperature record of 49.6C
. Meanwhile, a United Nations report
released in August
found that climate change is proceeding at a faster pace and producing widespread effects that are more definitively tied to human influence than ever before.
“Climate change has long been a political football, to be kicked around by different viewpoints... while everyone is entitled to an opinion, facts are sacred and cannot be bent,”
says
Globe and Mail editor-in-chief and World News Day founder, David Walmsley.
“Instead of polarisation, fact-based journalism offers something much more precious. It offers solutions. And that is the intention of World News Day – to showcase our audiences, and what journalism is doing to respond to their demands.”
On September 28, actor Victor Garber and journalist Farah Nasser will host
World News Day: The Climate Crisis
. The flagship virtual event will spotlight a striking collection of climate stories from a selection of the world’s biggest news organizations – highlighting regional climate change issues, activism and solutions.
The 75-minute event is free, open to a global audience and available in all time zones.
Take a deeper dive into Canada’s climate change and environment news with our Globe Climate newsletter, giving you a summary of the week’s most important headlines.
Sign up today.
                


https://www.theglobeandmail.com/world/article-world-news-day-2021-how-newsrooms-are-confronting-the-climate-crisis/




The globe and mail 4
On Earth Day, the Globe reflects on the journey of its green evolution
The Globe has often, if not always, been a fierce advocate for environmental solutions proposed by our best scientific minds


                    
When record-breaking rains fell on British Columbia in November, 2021, Wayne and Rhonda MacDonald braced for the worst. It had been that kind of year.
Four months earlier, the couple watched anxiously as a massive wildfire approach their Bar-FX cattle ranch in the Nicola Valley, in the province’s southern Interior. This was after another earlier blaze levelled the town of Lytton on June 29, a day after the small community saw the temperature soar to a Canadian record 49.6 Celcius. The BC Coroners Service later said that 619 people in the province died from the extreme heat that lasted from June 25 to July 1, the deadliest weather event in Canadian history.
The MacDonalds lost 32 animals and 70 per cent of their rangeland in the fire that raged through the Nicola Valley but they managed to save their home. Others weren’t so lucky. Wildfires throughout B.C. that month forced thousands to flee their properties and placed tens of thousands more on evacuation alert, ultimately destroying nearly 9,000 square kilometres of forest – about 1½ times the size of Prince Edward Island.
Open this photo in gallery:
Floodwaters cover farmland in Abbotsford, B.C., after the 'atmospheric river' landed in November of 2021.
Darryl Dyck/The Canadian Press
Then the rains came. On Nov. 13, an elongated strand of moisture-laden air – known as an atmospheric river – unleashed its cargo on the province. More rain fell over three days than normally falls in the entire month of November, destroying highways and bridges and cutting off vital supply links to the rest of the country. The damage totalled in the many billions of dollars.
In the valley, the Nicola River spilled its banks, swallowing two hectares of the MacDonalds’ property, including a calving barn. The flood destroyed their irrigation system. The fire-scarred landscape couldn’t contain the moisture, repelling much of it down mountainsides to create even greater devastation. A half-dozen neighbouring homes were washed away.
“We were so afraid of the fire,” Rhonda MacDonald told The Globe and Mail in the aftermath. “But it was the flood that ended up taking us out.”
Open this photo in gallery:
Rhonda and Wayne MacDonald spoke with The Globe about the flooding that ruined the Bar FX Ranch in B.C.
Darryl Dyck/The Globe and Mail
If the country needed an illustration of what the future might look like as the planet continues to warm, it was on full display in
B.C.
that year. “Extreme heat, fire, drought, record rain, floods: It feels biblical. And it is all interconnected and made worse by climate heating,” The Globe’s editorial board wrote on Nov. 18, 2021. “Canada is heating twice as fast as the global average. … The No. 1 thing to do is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as quickly and as soon as possible.”
Throughout its history, The Globe has chronicled the many environmental threats facing Canada. Beyond reporting on these events, the paper has often, if not always, been a fierce advocate for changes proposed by our best scientific minds, as the country and the world confronted everything from the use of the insecticide DDT to acid rain and the growing hole in our ozone layer.
But The Globe’s position on some matters, especially climate change, would anger parts of the country, particularly
Alberta
, where governments accused the paper of being out of touch with the province’s economic realities even while global fossil-fuel production put the planet in an increasingly precarious position.
Others would point to the contradiction of warning about global warming on one page while endorsing the latest proposed oil or gas pipeline on the other. The paper has often struggled to balance local interests and global concerns.
Lytton, shown in 1889 or 1890, started life as a settlement for gold prospectors bound for the Fraser Canyon. In 2022, a year after the fire, Lytton was a ghost town; only some properties were cleared of debris and residents did not know when, if ever, they could return.
C.S. Bailey and Co./City of Vancouver Archives; Melissa Tait/The Globe and Mail
In the 1880s and 90s, The Globe’s environmental coverage largely concentrated on the proper management of the country’s forests. The mentality of the time was to “clear them as speedily as possible,” said a story on May 31, 1875, titled “The destruction of forests.” But the story offered hope for a day “when their preservation and renewal will have to be as much a matter of public policy as of private advantage.”
In the first half of the 20th century, environmental coverage focused on the protection of habitat. “The United States and Britain both teach a lesson that may be studied with advantage by those who would open the way to timber and game pillage and expose our Northern heritage to needless fire hazards,” said a 1933 editorial. Bison, whooping cranes and other species – even the iconic beaver – were all at risk.
The publication in 1962 of
Silent Spring
, a book by U.S. biologist and ecologist Rachel Carson, helped launch the modern environmental
movement, with its warning of the deadly effects of the pesticide DDT. Carson’s findings alarmed The Globe, which warned in a July, 1962, editorial that insecticides “dangerously disturb the balance of nature and may release upon humanity more harmful forces than the pests they destroy.”
Open this photo in gallery:
Toronto municipal workers collect more than a ton of pesticides on Dec. 11, 1969, ahead of Ontario's ban on most uses of DDT.
Barrie Davis / The Globe and Mail
In the 1970s, The Globe’s first environmental beat reporter, Peter Whelan, covered topics such as high mercury levels in Ontario lakes that contaminated fish stocks. Then came Victor Malarek, who warned in a July, 1979, story that “as many as 50,000 Canadian lakes may be seriously endangered over the next two decades because of acid rain.”
In many respects, the debate that enveloped acid rain was a harbinger of things to come with climate change. The federal government warned that industries needed to clean up their act or Ottawa would step in with punitive action. Many corporations blamed pollution wafting up from the U.S. for the problem, but science didn’t bear out that claim. “A report from the Great Lakes Advisory Board has estimated
sulphur dioxide is responsible for
$1.7-billion in health costs and $2-billion in architectural damage annually in the United States,” a Globe editorial said in October, 1979.
Eventually, industries on both sides of the border began drastically reducing toxic emissions, even as Canada and the U.S. established an air-quality agreement in 1991 to address transboundary pollution.
Open this photo in gallery:
Gaps in the South Pole's ozone layer, caused by human-made chemicals, spurred governments to act and ban the damaging products.
NASA
Along with acid rain, a growing hole in the Earth’s ozone layer alarmed environmentalists and government officials. Scientists determined that hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) – gases used in refrigeration, air conditioning and aerosol products – were damaging the Earth’s stratospheric ozone layer, vital for protecting humans from potentially deadly ultraviolet solar radiation.
Then-prime minister Brian Mulroney helped spearhead what became known as the Montreal Protocol, signed in September, 1987. As of this writing, nearly 200 countries have ratified the accord, which phased out several gases that were depleting the ozone layer.
“We like to think that this moves us down the road to the day when industry and the environment will not be locked in combat, each blindly defending or promoting a set of interests,” a Globe editorial said of the accord. The ozone layer continues to gradually heal and recover.
In the 1990s, the eyes of the environmental world focused on a pristine swath of old-growth forests on the west side of Vancouver Island known as Clayoquot Sound. The B.C. NDP government of Mike Harcourt announced a plan to allow commercial logging in almost half of the area and
limit
logging in another 18 per cent of the territory. The decision touched off the War in the Woods, one of the largest environmental protests in the country’s history, culminating in the arrests of 856 people in the summer of 1993.
In a July, 1993, editorial, The Globe acknowledged the balancing act the B.C. government faced between allowing commercial logging to take place and protecting virgin forests. However, the government “leaned too far toward placating an already existing local industry and not enough toward protection of an ecologically valuable resource.” That said, the paper had little appetite for histrionic protests, stating in a July, 1995, editorial that demonstrators needed to stop equating logging “with the rape of the environment and recognize it for what it is: a sensible, sustainable way of taking wood from the woods.”
A compromise in 1996 saw the area in which logging could occur drastically reduced. In 2000, UNESCO designated the entire sound a Biosphere Reserve.
Open this photo in gallery:
Police in Vienna carry a Greenpeace supporter away from the Canadian embassy in 1993, during a protest against logging in Clayoquot Sound.
Ronald Zak/The Associated Press
The protests at Clayoquot typified the growing phenomenon of aggressive environmental activism. Young Canadians in particular considered themselves guardians of the Earth, giving rise to numerous environmental organizations, particularly in B.C. The most famous was Greenpeace, which had its beginnings in Vancouver in 1971.
In one of its earliest expeditions, a boat crew headed for the Aleutian island of Amchitka in Alaska, seeking to disrupt U.S. plans to detonate five megatons of nuclear explosives below the Pacific Ocean. In a September, 1971, editorial, The Globe called the protest “a useful gesture by a courageous group even merely as a means of drawing world attention to the Amchitka experiment.”
The paper was also on Greenpeace’s side when one of its vessels was rammed by the French navy in 1971 during an excursion to protest nuclear testing at the Mururoa atoll in French Polynesia. “We don’t usually have much sympathy for Greenpeace, whose grandstanding tactics usually induce companies and governments to do the wrong thing (curtail the Atlantic seal hunt; scrap, not sink, a North Sea oil platform). But in this case, the cause is good and the tactics, so far, acceptable.”
In the following decades, The Globe would often support Greenpeace’s position on various environmental issues, while opposing its
tactics.
The organization held a particularly profound meaning for Globe reporter Justine Hunter, whose father, Bob, co-founded the organization. In a poignant piece published in 2015, she talked about finally finding peace with the distant relationship she had with her father, who was so often away on one long adventure after another, leaving her missing him.
Ten years after Bob Hunter’s death from cancer, Justine brought his ashes to Hanson Island, one of the gateways to the Great Bear Rainforest and a place that held a special meaning for him.
“I took a handful of ashes and swung my open hand over the waters of Blackfish Sound, and let go.”
On Aug. 3, 1970, The Globe
published its first story
chronicling the concerns of scientists about the warming effect of pollutants on the stratosphere. At the time, the paper was skeptical. “The effect of increasing quantities of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere (believed to raise temperatures by the “greenhouse effect”) has resulted in little climate change this century,” the story concluded.
But as the decade unfolded, the tenor of those stories changed, warning with increasing alarm of the potential catastrophic impact of climate change. By the 1980s, scientists began removing all doubt about what lay ahead if action wasn’t taken to curb greenhouse-gas emissions.
Michael Keating remembers his first major story on climate change, published on Oct. 22, 1983, under the headline, “Greenhouse effect: what happens in Canada?” It ran on the front page.
“Experts predict parts of Canada will be flooded, others turned into dustbowls and balmy temperatures could moderate the bitter winters,” he wrote. “Prince Edward Island will likely be cut in half by the rising Atlantic Ocean, but the Northwest Passage could open to summer shipping. There will be less water in the Great Lakes and droughts in the prairies.”
“What I find impressive is how well they were able to predict changes back then,” Keating says now. “It shows the science was already well established but had escaped public attention.”
Open this photo in gallery:
Climate protesters rally on Parliament Hill in 2019.
Chris Wattie/Reuters
Between the formation in 1988 of the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the start of 2023, The Globe editorial board wrote nearly 400 pieces that mentioned climate change. Many called for domestic and global action on the issue.
But provincial governments that depended on revenue from the fossil-fuel industry, such as
Alberta, resisted aggressive action to cut emissions. There were some in the country who believed governments were creating a panic where one did not need to exist.
And as a business newspaper, The Globe often sided with industry over the contentious issue of pipelines. Over the years, the paper backed the building of plenty of them. In a September, 2011, editorial, the paper threw its support behind the Keystone XL pipeline expansion, which would have carried Alberta oil to points south. The paper said that pipeline opponents, including then-U.S. president Barack Obama, seemed intent on “blocking something that will create a continuing and jointly shared economic benefit.” An August, 2013, editorial called the proposed Energy East pipeline “a laudable initiative, one that the Quebec government should see fit to back.” A December, 2013, editorial said, “Concern about climate change should not be a reason to oppose” the proposed Northern Gateway pipeline. Oil, the paper said, “is going to move, one way or the other,” and the degree of risk of an oil spill should determine whether a pipeline is approved. All three pipelines were cancelled or not approved.
Open this photo in gallery:
Margaret Wente rides the subway in 2006 for a Globe column, an experiment in living without her gas-guzzling Mazda Tribute SUV.
Jim Ross/The Globe and Mail
No one stirred more ire over The Globe’s coverage of environmental issues than star columnist Margaret Wente.
A noted contrarian, Wente wrote about Danish statistician Bjorn Lomborg, who questioned the “doomsayers” who maintained the planet was heading for oblivion because of global warming. In another piece, she wrote that serious scientists “have given up trying to explain why the entire edifice of global warming was an intellectual house of cards.”
She had letter-writers and bloggers up in arms.
In an interview, Wente stands by her columns. “Climate change and global warming account for more cultism and groupthink than any other issue of our time,” she says. “Don’t get me wrong. Global warming is certainly for real. … But the hysterical doom-mongering and predictions of apocalyptic collapse are not science-based.”
Some environmentalists were dismayed with The Globe for not taking a tougher stand on global warming. “On climate change, I would suggest that The Globe has … erred on the side of politics and short-term economic agendas over the science and urgency,” says Tzeporah Berman, co-founder of
Stand.earth
, and one of the world’s leading climate activists.
Open this photo in gallery:
Rhonda MacDonald checks on one of the horses at Bar FX Ranch, one year after the floodwaters came through the Nicola Valley.
Darryl Dyck/The Globe and Mail
The climate-related calamities that hit B.C. in 2021 gave the country a look at what the future might hold if the planet continues to warm at current rates. The MacDonalds of the Bar-FX ranch in the
Nicola Valley emerged from the year alive, but faced difficult questions about a way forward. Did they even want to stay where they lived?
Others faced the same dilemma, as they struggled to come to terms with surroundings that were now completely different.
“I saw in people, especially older folks, a kind of mournful disorientation with the world around them,” recalls Globe reporter Nancy Macdonald, who covered all three 2021 climate-related disasters in B.C. “I later learned there is a term for this – ‘solastalgia’ – which was coined by Australian philosopher Glenn Albrecht. It is a form of homesickness one gets when one is still home, but the environment has been altered and feels unfamiliar.”
We may all feel solastalgic in the years ahead, as climate change renders our world more unrecognizable by the day.
Gary Mason is a national affairs columnist at The Globe and Mail, based in Vancouver.
Editor’s note:
A previous version of this article incorrectly stated that the Lytton fire also destroyed the Bar-FX ranch. They were two separate wildfires. This version has been updated.
The Globe at 180: More reading
Open this photo in gallery:
Fred Lum/The Globe and Mail
CEO Andrew Saunders: After 180 years, our promise – journalism that matters – is unchanged
How The Globe aligned its Arctic coverage with a truer image of the North
When The Globe changed its outlook on Africville, the razing and the racism
George Brown helped create Canada in spite of himself
Who is Junius? The subject who is truly loyal to the Chief Magistrate wants to know
Meet the queens of the Gilded Age who pioneered women’s journalism in Canada
                




https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-environment-coverage-globe-and-mail-history/


The guardian australia 1 


Carbon credit trade rules approved, breaking lengthy deadlock – Cop29 day one, as it happened


                    
Key events
11 Nov 2024
Closing summary
11 Nov 2024
Carbon credit trade rules approved
11 Nov 2024
'Fossil fuel companies broke the planet, they should pay for it,' says website cop29.com
11 Nov 2024
Trump victory 'not the end of fight for a cleaner planet', says US climate envoy
11 Nov 2024
2024 is on track to be hottest year on record as warming temporarily hits 1.5°C
11 Nov 2024
Windfall ‘superprofits’ from oil companies totalled half a trillions dollars in a single year
11 Nov 2024
Global north owes $5tn a year climate debt to global south, campaigners say
11 Nov 2024
Greta Thunberg calls protest against Cop29 in Georgia as Azerbaijan closes land borders
11 Nov 2024
Developing nations need $1bn a day to pay for climate impacts - UN
Show key events only
Please turn on JavaScript to use this feature
Closing summary
We’re now closing the blog for the day.
Cop29
has got off to a bit of a rocky start, with severe delays for the opening plenary, but the hosts will claim that getting the draft decision on article 6 approved is an early win. Environmental campaigners will feel otherwise.
The key events today were:
Diplomats greenlit key rules that govern the trade of carbon credits, breaking a years-long deadlock over contentious carbon markets
The year 2024 is on track to be the warmest year on record after an extended streak of exceptionally high monthly global mean temperatures, the World Meteorological Organisation said
US climate envoy John Podesta said the climate fight will not stop under new president Donald Trump.
Windfall ‘superprofits’ from oil companies totalled half a trillion dollars in a single year
A hyperrealistic “dead beached whale” drew attention in Baku
UN climate chief Simon Stiell told the conference: “What inspires me is human ingenuity and determination. Our ability to get knocked down and to get up again over and over again, until we accomplish our goals.”
A press conference by the presidency that had been scheduled to take place after the opening plenary has been pushed back to tomorrow morning, so that’s likely to be the last we’ll hear from Babayev and the hosts today.
However, critical reaction to the article 6 will continue – Erika Lennon, a senior attorney at the Center for International Environmental Law, has said:
Today, states allowed this rogue move from the supervisory body to prevail in the quest to start Cop29 with a ‘win’. But this is hardly a win for people or the planet. Approving these carbon market rules without discussion or debate, sets a dangerous precedent for the entire negotiation process. This is very concerning from a procedural standpoint: it bypasses states’ ability to even discuss, much less revise the standards before they go into effect. States’ oversight is all the more critical as the supervisory body’s efforts to get this done has resulted in risky rules that will lead to human rights violations and environmental harm.
While states won’t be able to undo this move, they can still partially correct the wrong by giving strong guidance to the supervisory body that ensures further rules are adopted in line with science, human rights, and international law.“
Lise Masson
of Friends of the Earth has responded to the article 6 news with disappointment, a reaction likely to be shared by many climate campaigners:
“The gavelling through of carbon markets on the first day of Cop29 is unacceptable and undermines the credibility of the whole process. Further, it is opening the floodgates for a global carbon market that will have devastating impacts on communities in the global south, on Indigenous peoples, and on small peasant farmers first and foremost. Carbon markets are not climate finance, and we cannot accept these neocolonial schemes to be propped up as a success of Cop29 in lieu of paying the climate debt owed to the global south.”
Carbon credit trade rules approved
Diplomats have greenlit key rules that govern the trade of “carbon credits” at the end of the first day of
Cop29
in Azerbaijan, breaking a yearslong deadlock over contentious carbon markets.
The draft decision on article 6 (which
can be read here
) goes through with no objection to a round of applause.
This will concern some delegates, and one speaker immediately expresses concern that the way the decision was rushed through at the start of the conference does not reflect the collaborative way these things should be worked on, and urges the conference not to continue this trend. This is a reference to Cop28, where the UAE similarly pushed through a first day decision despite the worries of some countries.
Damien Gayle
In London, climate activists marked the first day of the
Cop29
climate summit in Azerbaijan with a protest outside the headquarters of the oil and gas company BP.
Protestors held a banner reading: “BP, stop fuelling genocide and climate breakdown.” They called on the company to halt its oil and gas extraction, its “hijacking” of the conference of the parties process and its ‘profiteering from genocide’.
A statement to press circulated by Fossil Free London, which organised the protest, said BP has a long-term corporate relationship with the State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (Socar) and that the two companies recently agreed to explore new fields to drill.
The Cop29 president, Mukhtar Babayev,
spent 26 years working for SOCAR
.
BREAKING: We're outside BP's HQ to demand they stop fuelling genocide and climate breakdown.
COP29 starts today in Azerbaijan. This action is part of a global callout to highlight the links between BP, SOCAR and the Azerbaijani pipeline, BTC, which fuels Israel's genocide.
pic.twitter.com/ubFkbR9VZt
— Fossil Free London (@fossilfreeLDN)
November 11, 2024
The demonstration was responding to an international campaign coordinated by Energy Embargo for Palestine, Filistin İçin 1000 Genç and the Palestinian-led Global Energy Embargo for Palestine.
About 30% of Israel’s oil is sourced from Azerbaijan, reaching the middle east via Turkey through the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline, which is majority owned by BP. Socar is the second largest shareholder in the pipeline.
Joanna Warrington
, a campaigner with Fossil Free London, said: “It’s the very same fossil fuel giants that profit from the suffering of billions as our climate tips closer to collapse, which are fuelling and enabling Israel’s horrific colonial genocide. This is all playing out right in front of our world leaders, who sit clapping in the audience instead of standing up to protect human rights and life.
“Climate crisis and genocide are being made and supported here in London. Our global political processes are being polluted by corporations like BP that continue to tear up our society so that the resultant blood flow can carry massive profits to them.”
Food and drink is always a crucial element at the annual climate summits, and as journalists and negotiators begin the long journey of finding their way around the texts and issues, they also put time into finding their way around the massive site, and discovering what they’re going to be eating for the next two weeks.
One of the cafe menus at Cop
Photograph: Fiona Harvey
Sadly for a climate conference, it looks as if the vegan option is currently the most expensive one.
And an Americano with soy milk is a handsome £7.50.
The UK’s net zero secretary is heading for Cop which is, he says, the “once a year chance to put countries on the spot”.
“At this summit you’ll have a British government representing which believes in doing its bit at home and abroad,” he says in this wee video. Of course, he has a fair point; in a number of countries around they just don’t have that luxury.
Cop29 president Mukhtar Babayev finally appears on stage to apologise for the delay and says he hopes to conclude today’s meeting by 11pm tonight local time (7pm GMT).
Most of his statement is formulaic, announcing when various subsidiary bodies will report back on their progress through the conference.
Babayev says he will do everything he can to conclude negotiations in the second half of the conference.
The crucial matter of article 6.4 is agenda item 15b, but Babayev is moving fast. To read more about that thorny issue, my colleague Patrick Greenfield has explained more here:
Ajit Niranjan
Cop-watchers hoping for an early breakthrough on carbon markets are instead waiting for a much-delayed plenary session to resume. This morning’s opening session, which was paused due to fights over the summit agenda, has been inching back in one-hour and half-hour increments as the new scheduled times approach.
Pauses to proceedings aren’t a new phenomenon at climate summits - the talks are complex and procedural issues are often a source of frustration for weary negotiators - but delays are more common at the end of the conference, when they enter their final frantic phase, rather than on the first day.
Mohamed Adow of the thinktank Power Shift Africa has been tweeting about the reasons behind the delays to the opening, which he attributes to wrangling over what the global stocktake covers:
Thirdly, the adoption of the COP29 agenda has been delayed, as developed and developing countries fight over the ‘scope’ of the UAE Dialogue, and whether it is only on finance related outcomes of the Global Stocktake (GST) or whether it covers all the GST outcome and this…
— Mohamed Adow (@mohadow)
November 11, 2024
'Fossil fuel companies broke the planet, they should pay for it,' says website cop29.com
Damian Carrington
Anyone clicking on to
www.cop29.com
is in for a surprise. The site has been acquired by Global Witness and now leads with the faces of five big oil bosses and the headline “Fossil fuel companies are destroying the planet for profit. They broke it, they should pay for it.”
The CEOs are Mike Wirth at Chevron, Patrick Pouyanné at TotalEnergies, Murray Auchinloss at BP, Darren Woods at ExxonMobil and Wael Sawan at Shell.
The site is promoting Global Witness’s “Payback Time” campaign, which is supported by actor Rosario Dawson, film director Adam McKay, activists Vanessa Nakate and Luisa Neubauer and more.
The oil and gas industry made
$4tn in pre-tax profits
in 2022, notes Global Witness. That is 10 times the annual cost of climate damages in developing countries, estimated at about $400bn a year. The UN’s Loss and Damage Fund, aimed at helping poorer nations hit by climate disasters, contains
less than 0.2%
of this $400bn figure.
Mary Robinson, formerly UN climate envoy and President of Ireland, said: “People need money to rebuild and adapt to our increasingly extreme climate. But right now the oil and gas companies fuelling climate collapse are getting away scot-free – making immense profits from products they have known for decades would harm the planet. It’s high time we made them pay up.”
Luana, an Indigenous climate activist whose community was hit by the recent devastating floods in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, said: “Everyone is afraid of the rain now, and all four seasons can happen on the same day. It’s the big companies who are largely responsible, so they should pay more, right?”
Global Witness said it acquired the
cop29.com
site from an Indian couple who used the domain for their family business. They were offered a significant sum by Azerbaijan’s COP29 team for the site, Global Witness said, but the owners were worried about climate breakdown and decided to let Global Witness have it instead.
Trump victory 'not the end of fight for a cleaner planet', says US climate envoy
Dharna Noor
At
Cop29
on Monday evening, US climate envoy John Podesta said the climate fight will not stop under President Trump.
“Although under Donald Trump’s leadership the U.S. federal government placed climate-related actions on the back burner, efforts to prevent climate change remain a commitment in the U.S. and will confidently continue,” he said.
Trump has pledged to deregulate the energy sector and pull the nation from the Paris Climate Agreement. Yet “this is not the end of our fight for a cleaner, safer planet,” Podesta said.
Under President Biden, the US passed the Inflation Reduction Act, the largest downpayment on the green transition seen in US history. “The fight is bigger than one election, one political cycle in one country,” said Podesta. The UN climate conference in Baku represents a “critical opportunity to cement our progress.”
Among the United States’ top goals for the climate talks will be securing mitigation plans for greenhouse gases other than CO2, such as methane. On Tuesday, the nation will co-host a summit on the issue with China and Cop29 host Azerbaijan.
Other major priorities, Podesta said, will be reaching an agreement on the use of carbon trading and increasing ambition on clean energy deployment,
Another crucial component of the climate talks, Podesta said, will be ensuring small economies have access to climate finance from rich nations — “very important work”.
“COP29 is a crucial opportunity to solidify our progress and keep 1.5 degrees alive, accelerate progress in reducing all greenhouse gases, and perhaps most importantly, strengthen global cooperation in adaptation and climate finance. We are here to work, and we are committed to achieving a successful outcome at COP29.”
Ajit Niranjan
The
Cop29
presidency is hoping to score an early win by ending a years-long blockage over rules to govern carbon markets.
In theory carbon markets let rich countries or more often corporations buy “carbon credits” from poor countries; the company or country buys them via an organisation which promises to pay communities to do things like planting trees and building wind turbines, and that buys the country/corporation more time to cut their own pollution. It’s an idea that could speed up the energy transition by bringing cash to where it’s needed - but has been held back by the dodgy and harmful projects that have plagued the system since the start.
Civil society groups fear the final rules to bring the market to life may be gavelled through in Baku without a proper debate, after a supervisory body adopted standards last month in a process that critics say overstepped its mandate.
They are also keen to stress that the money from carbon markets should not replace the vast sums of climate finance that poor countries say they are owed by richer ones - a point also made by a Drake-themed sticker spotted on a water bottle at the conference.
A Drake-themed sticker on a water bottle at the conference
Photograph: Ajit Niranjan
2024 is on track to be hottest year on record as warming temporarily hits 1.5°C
The year 2024 is on track to be the warmest year on record after an extended streak of exceptionally high monthly global mean temperatures, the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) has announced.
The global mean surface air temperature between January – September 2024was 1.54 °C above the pre-industrial average.
Photograph: World Meteorological Organisation
The January – September 2024 global mean surface air temperature was 1.54 °C (with a margin of uncertainty of ±0.13°C) above the pre-industrial average, boosted by a warming El Niño event, according to an analysis of six international datasets used by WMO.
Greenhouse Gases
reached record observed levels in 2023. Real time data indicate that they continued to rise in 2024. The atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO
2
) has increased from around 278 ppm in 1750 to 420 ppm in 2023, an increase of 51%. This traps heat and causes temperatures to rise.
Ocean heat content
in 2023 was the highest on record and preliminary data show 2024 has continued at comparable levels. Ocean warming rates show a particularly strong increase in the past two decades. From 2005 to 2023, the ocean absorbed on average approximately 3.1 million terawatt-hours (TWh) of heat each year. This is more than 18 times the world’s energy consumption in 2023.
Sea level rise
is accelerating because of thermal expansion of warmer waters and melting glaciers and ice sheets. From 2014-2023, global mean sea level rose at a rate of 4.77 mm per year, more than double the rate between 1993 and 2002. The El Niño effect meant it grew even more rapidly in 2023. Preliminary 2024 data shows that, with the decline of El Niño, it has fallen back to levels consistent with the rising trend from 2014 to 2022.
Glacier loss
is worsening. In 2023, glaciers lost a record 1.2-meter water equivalent of ice – about five times the amount of water in the Dead Sea. It was the largest loss since measurements began in 1953 and was due to extreme melting in North America and Europe. In Switzerland, glaciers lost about 10% of their remaining volume in 2021/2022 and 2022/2023.
Ben Spencer, science editor at the Sunday Times, is also at the press conference. John Podesta has stated that climate change “is a matter of life and death”, and warns that when Trump says he will dismantle the fight against global warming “we should believe him”.
#cop29
Biden's climate envoy John Podesta: climate change "is a matter of life and death". And when Trump says he will dismantle the fight against global warming "we should believe him".
#cop29
pic.twitter.com/D94TbIcX6c
— Ben Spencer (@Ben_Spencer)
November 11, 2024
                


https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2024/nov/11/cop29-live-the-climate-summit-gets-under-way-in-azerbaijan


The guardian australia 2 


Reality check’: Global CO2 emissions shooting back to record levels
This article is more than 3 years old
Fossil fuels are surging in post-pandemic recovery as scientists warn 1.5C emission limits will be reached in 11 years


Global carbon emissions are shooting back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic levels, new analysis has shown. Scientists said the finding is a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at the Cop26 climate summit.
The emissions driving the climate crisis reached their highest ever levels in 2019, before global coronavirus lockdowns saw them fall by 5.4%. However, fossil fuel burning has surged faster than expected in 2021, the international research team said, in stark contrast to the rapid cuts needed to tackle global heating.
The data shows world leaders have failed to build back greener, with just a small proportion of pandemic spending going to sustainable sectors. But the scientists said hopes of keeping global heating to 1.5C remain alive if Cop26 leads to rapid global action.
The Global Carbon Project (GCP) report shows emissions from coal and gas jumping this year by more than they fell in 2020. Oil use is also rising in 2021, but more slowly because transport activity remains below normal.
Unlike most countries, emissions in the world’s biggest polluter, China, actually rose slightly during the pandemic in 2020 and are expected to rise another 4% in 2021. India has very low emissions per person but will see CO2 rise 12.6% in 2021, almost double the fall in 2020.
The US and EU27 will also see sharp rises of 7.6% in 2021, but remain on a longer term trend of slowly declining emissions. Renewables were the only energy source that continued to grow during the pandemic.
The scientists said 2022 could set a new record for global emissions, depending on whether the expected increased in oil consumption, as travel recovers further, is offset by reversal of the surge in coal burning seen in 2021.
The world’s “carbon budget” is the total emissions allowed to retain a 50% chance of keeping global temperature rise below 1.5C, but analysis shows this will be blown in 11 years if the current rate of emissions continues.
“What is surprising is that [the rebound in emissions] happened so quickly, in spite of the fact that much of the global economy has not yet recovered,” said Prof Corinne Le Quéré, at the University of East Anglia, UK, and one of the analysis team. “This is really a reality check.”
“However, we do not yet see the effect of the climate policy decisions that will be taken at Cop26 in Glasgow, which could be really a gamechanger,” she said. “1.5C is still alive. The decrease in emissions needed is very large indeed, but feasible with concerted action.”
Glen Peters, at the Centre for International Climate Research in Oslo, Norway, said: “Many of us were [expecting] a recovery spread out over a few years, as opposed to a big hit in 2021.” He said Covid recovery funding had been too “dirty”, with not enough low-carbon investment. “If we continue on the current trajectory, then that may push emissions in 2022 up.”
Prof Pierre Friedlingstein, at the University of Exeter, UK, said: “To achieve net zero by 2050, we must cut emissions every year by an amount comparable to that seen during Covid. This highlights the scale of the action that is now required, and the importance of Cop26.”
The 196 nations at the Cop26 summit are charged with pushing national pledges to cut emissions towards that needed for 1.5C, with India’s new commitment to net zero a notable advance. But the $100bn promised by rich nations to poorer nations has yet to be delivered. Voluntary international pacts to end deforestation, cut methane emissions and make green technology the cheapest option have been announced. But global heating will only stop when emissions reach net zero.
The GCP report was produced by almost 100 scientists from 70 organisations across the world and, based on the figures to date, calculated that CO2 emissions from fossil fuels will rise by between 4.1% and 5.7% in 2021, compared with a fall of 5.4% in 2020. That fall is bigger than seen after the global financial crisis in 2008 (1.2%) and the collapse of the Soviet Union (3.1%).
Emissions will have to be reduced by even greater amounts to hit net zero by 2050. But Le Quéré said: “We know what to do: move out of coal, electrify transport, and reforest.” She said a quarter of emissions come from countries that had been steadily decreasing emissions while growing their economies, including the UK, Germany, the US, Japan and Mexico.
“The key message is to resist the temptation to be discouraged by our latest findings,” she said. “The commitments being put in place at Cop26 are really important. It’s important that the countries agree on what they’re going to do and then, of course, plan for immediate implementation.”
The surge in emissions in 2021 resulted from Covid recovery packages largely funding existing, polluting industries including steel, cement and construction, particularly in China, Peters said: “China is, on the one hand, making extremely good progress, deploying solar and wind and electric vehicles. On the other hand, its economic recovery packages tend to go back to the old way of doing things. But there’s another 70% of global emissions that are not from China as well.”
Whether 2022 sees a new record for global emissions depends on whether the burst of coal burning seen during the pandemic recovery was a temporary “sugar hit” or continues, he said.


https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/nov/04/reality-check-global-co2-emissions-shooting-back-to-record-levels


The guardian australia 3 
Smoke from Australian bushfires depleted ozone layer by up to 5% in 2020, study finds
This article is more than 1 year old
Lead researcher says destruction was similar to process of Antarctic ozone hole forming each spring ‘but at much warmer temperatures’


Particles in bushfire smoke can activate molecules that destroy the ozone layer, according to new research that suggests future ozone recovery may be delayed by increasingly intense and frequent fires.
A study published in the journal Nature has found that smoke from the 2019-20 Australian bushfires temporarily depleted the ozone layer by 3% to 5% in 2020.
Smoke from the fires, which circulated around the globe, was ejected into the stratosphere, the second layer in Earth’s atmosphere, by a pyrocumulonimbus cloud.
In the ozone layer – part of the stratosphere – molecules of ozone gas absorb high-energy ultraviolet rays from the sun. This lessens the amount of radiation that reaches the Earth’s surface.
The lead researcher, Prof Susan Solomon, an atmospheric scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the US, said the ozone destruction by smoke particles was similar to the process of the Antarctic ozone hole forming each spring, “but at much warmer temperatures”.
Smoke aerosols, the researchers found, can activate chlorine to form compounds that then destroy ozone molecules.
Solomon said chlorine in the stratosphere had been decreasing since the 1987 Montreal protocol phased out the use of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons. “There’s a tremendous science policy success story there,” she said. “The slow recovery of the ozone layer is on the order of 1% per decade in the mid-latitudes.”
But she warned that more frequent fires could delay ozone recovery. “All of a sudden, in one year [2020], we had a 3% to 5% loss. It’ll recover if that’s the only year that it happens, but not if it keeps happening.
“The question in my mind is: is the man-made chlorine going to get … diluted and destroyed out of the atmosphere faster than global climate change is going to increase the frequency and intensity of this kind of fire? I think it’s going to be a race.”
Dr Martin Jucker, a lecturer at the University of New South Wales who was not involved in the research, agreed that the ozone hole might recover more slowly than expected as the result of more bushfires in future.
skip past newsletter promotionafter newsletter promotion
“Of particular interest for Australia is the extension of the ozone hole further equatorward, which means that the ozone layer can become thinner much closer to where millions of Australians live,” he said.
Dr Laura Revell, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Canterbury in New Zealand, said: “Early signs of Antarctic ozone recovery have been visible since approximately the mid-2010s. In the absence of any major changes, we expect that stratospheric chlorine concentrations will gradually decrease this century and that the ozone hole will get smaller year by year.
“Of concern is that while the ozone hole usually forms over Antarctica because of the cold temperatures there, wildfire aerosols appear to be capable of promoting ozone losses at the relatively warmer temperatures present at mid-latitudes which are heavily populated.”
Solomon and her colleagues identified that the ozone-destruction process was triggered by hydrochloric acid in the stratosphere dissolving in the smoke aerosols.
Hydrochloric acid dissolved about a thousand times more readily in the smoke aerosols than in the “the normal sulphuric acid and water stratospheric particles”, Solomon said.
“From a scientific point of view, it’s very exciting to see this brand new effect,” she said. “From a planetary point of view … it would be just tragic to have mankind screw up solving the ozone hole by deciding that we’re going to [allow] a lot more of these fires if we don’t mitigate climate change.”
Solomon added that it was important to determine whether the smoke from fires in Australia – where native forests are dominated by eucalypts – differed in composition from fires in other areas. “I don’t really see a chemical reason why that would be so, but it needs to be looked at.”


https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/mar/08/smoke-from-australian-bushfires-depleted-ozone-layer-by-up-to-5-in-2020-study-finds#:~:text=1%20year%20old-,Smoke%20from%20Australian%20bushfires%20depleted%20ozone%20layer%20by,5%25%20in%202020%2C%20study%20finds&text=Particles%20in%20bushfire%20smoke%20can,increasingly%20intense%20and%20frequent%20fires


The guardian australia 4




Smoke from Black Summer bushfires depleted ozone layer, study finds
This article is more than 3 years old
More intense bushfires due to climate change will slow recovery of ozone layer, scientist says
Smoke injected high into the atmosphere by the 2019-2020 Australian bushfires resulted in a depletion of the ozone layer, new research has found.
Scientists have found that the smoke from the devastating bushfires caused a 1% loss in ozone – an amount that typically takes one decade to recover.
The study, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy Of Sciences, suggests rising fire intensity and frequency due to the climate crisis may slow the recovery of the ozone layer.
The ozone layer – part of the stratosphere, the second layer of Earth’s atmosphere – absorbs ultraviolet radiation emitted by the sun and consists of a high concentration of ozone molecules.
Using satellite observations, researchers have found that the smoke aerosols reacted with nitrogen in the stratosphere, resulting in chemical shifts causing the depletion of ozone layer.
Read more
Study co-author Dr Kane Stone, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said the reduction occurred between March and August 2020.
“As the bushfire aerosols leave the stratosphere over time – they come back down to the [Earth’s] surface – ozone depletion stops,” Stone said. “This is a short term decrease, but it’s significant.
“We are currently seeing ozone recovery at about a 1% recovery a decade.”
Ozone is continuously replenished in the atmosphere above the tropics. “Sunlight reacts with oxygen and it creates ozone,” Stone said.
Despite the continual production of ozone, concentrations had been depleted by substances such as chlorofluorocarbons, which were phased out under the 1987 Montreal protocol.
Smoke from the 2019–2020 bushfires circumnavigated the globe, blanketing the middle latitudes of the southern hemisphere. The pyrocumulonimbus cloud formed during the event – three times larger than anything previously recorded – ejected smoke particles kilometres upwards into the stratosphere.
* Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
The researchers did not study if the bushfire smoke affected the Antarctic ozone hole, which occurs at more southern latitudes and develops annually during the southern hemisphere spring.
The director of the centre for atmospheric chemistry at the University of Wollongong who was not involved in the research, Prof Clare Murphy, said more intense fires in the future – as is predicted by current climate models – would slow down the recovery of the ozone layer.
“In the stratosphere, the pressure is very low … there’s not a lot of molecules around, so chemistry typically happens very slowly,” Murphy said. “You put [smoke] particles up there and suddenly you provide a surface on which the chemistry can happen many orders of magnitude faster.”
Efforts to address the Antarctic ozone hole were a successful example of coordinated environmental action, Murphy said. “There’s no reason that humanity can’t come together and solve the climate issues as well.”


https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/mar/01/smoke-from-black-summer-bushfires-depleted-ozone-layer-study-finds?CMP=share_btn_url


Abc news 1
Climate target overshoot could lead to centuries-long global fish habitat loss: study
Delaying efforts to keep global warming below 2 degrees Celsius is projected to have dire consequences for the world's marine fisheries.
Key points:
* Thirteen per cent of important fish habitat could be lost if climate targets are exceeded
* Significant mitigation from 2040 in a worst-case emissions scenario would not be enough to reverse ocean impacts
* Warmer oceans could lead to fewer and smaller fish
New modelling out to 2299 suggests overshooting climate targets could lead to a 13 per cent loss of important fish habitat in the top 200 metres of the ocean.
This zone, known as the epipelagic or "sunlight zone", is home to most of the world's marine fisheries.
Scientists warn fish species in this zone could become less resilient and more susceptible to things like disease with a 2C overshoot.
The decline in habitat was projected by scientists from France's National Centre for Meteorological Research, with help from the CSIRO and other international institutions, in a new study for Nature Communications Earth and Environment.
The researchers used a worst-case climate scenario, SSP5-3.4-OS, where global CO2 emissions continue unabated to 2040, before aggressive mitigation efforts are made to reach net zero emissions in the 2080s.
Surface air temperatures could reach between 2.4C to 4.1C above pre-industrial levels under this scenario, and be brought below 2C by the end of the century.
The ocean takes a lot longer to absorb and release heat, which means there will be a significant delay in ocean cooling, even after CO2 emissions are reduced.
And that could mean long-term impacts for fisheries managers trying to balance food demand with changing stocks.


Dr Andrew Lenton from the CSIRO. (Supplied: CSIRO)
The CSIRO's Andrew Lenton, a co-author on the study, said modelling showed that even 200 years after an overshoot, the rate of recovery for habitable ocean in the epipelagic zone was low.
"We're talking a lot about reaching net zero and we absolutely should be in line with the Paris Agreement," Dr Lenton said.
"The real risk here will be that we overshoot our emissions ... and as a consequence we'll end up locking in these changes that will be irreversible in our lifetimes.
"We can't really put emissions on a credit card and pay it back later. We're going to pay a pretty heavy interest rate on that."
Warming a 'double whammy' for fish
The United Nations announced in July that the planet was already on track for average air surface warming greater than 1.5C.
So far the average ocean surface level temperatures have increased by about 0.8 degrees compared to pre-industrial levels.
The new study suggests there could be a peak in surface temperature of 19.5C in 2072, based on an average across multiple models, about a decade after atmospheric CO2 peaks.
Surface temperature would drop to 18.8C in 2182 before rising above 19C over the next 100 years.


The new study paints a grim picture for fish in the epipelagic and mesopelagic zones of the world's oceans. (Getty Images: VectorMine)
There is a similar trend for epipelagic waters, while further down (200 to 1,000 metres) in the mesopelagic or "twilight zone", the average ocean temperature stays on an upward trend throughout the projection.
As part of the study, researchers examined how this warming might affect 72 marine species including prawns, scallops, mussels, lobsters, crabs, Atlantic cod and salmon.
As water temperatures increase, so to do the metabolic demands of fish and other sea creatures — meaning they expend more energy when resting and need more oxygen to survive.
Dr Lenton said this situation was compounded by the fact that sea water holds less oxygen when it is warmer.
"You're having an increase in [oxygen] demand and decrease in supply, so you're creating a double whammy for the fish," he said.
This would not suddenly mean underwater wastelands but there could be serious impacts, Dr Lenton added.
"We know life wants to adapt. There will be winners and losers.
"Fish might be smaller to allow for less metabolic demand, [so] you could get a decrease in the size of the fishery and some things [species] won't be viable.
"You'll end up with a new ecosystem or adapted ecosystem that responds to the changes."


The Atlantic cod, targeted by fisheries for thousands of years, is already facing pressure from climate change. (The bottom of the trap, no hope for these fish, Derek Keats, CC BY 2.0)
Climate change already affecting fisheries
More than 3.3 billion people get 20 per cent of their daily protein intake from fish, with demand set to double by 2050.
Marine finfish made up about 39 per cent of the total aquatic animal production for the world in 2020, according to the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the UN.
But FAO analysis indicates the fraction of fish stocks at biologically sustainable levels had decreased from 90 per cent in 1974 to 64.6 per cent as of 2019.
Research evaluating 124 marine species across 235 populations in 38 ecoregions found their maximum sustainable yield had dropped by 4.1 per cent from 1930 to 2010 due to warming waters.
Nineteen fish stocks, mostly near Northern Europe and Japan, were found to be 8 per cent less productive.
The same study also found instances of cascading effects on zooplankton, forage fish like sardines and demersal fish at the Celtic-Biscay Shelf off Ireland and the North Sea.
Wild-caught Atlantic cod in the North Sea saw its sustainability certification with the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) suspended in 2019 because of stock declines.
Research from last year claimed 64 per cent of population fluctuations for the North Sea cod fishery could be attributed to climate change while the rest was from the fishing itself.


MSC has noted anecdotal stories from commercial skippers of changes in yellowfin tuna distribution on Australia's east coast. (Supplied: WWF)
Closer to home in Australia, Matt Watson of MSC Asia Pacific thinks most commercial stocks are already facing some sort of climate change stress.
Skippers have encountered geographical changes to where they find yellowfin tuna on the east coast of Australia, he said.
"Or over in New Zealand, there are some wobbles in their hoki fishery and there's some arguments that that's driven by climate change as well.
"Management in fisheries can help add a level of resilience.
"You can kind of protect your resource if you have a good understanding of the kind of real-time impacts."


Phytoplankton is at the base of the ocean food web. It gets its energy from photosynthesis, and is eaten by zooplankton. (fish1880, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, CC BY 2.0)
Fish prey also facing decline
Climate change is not only affecting the fish we eat, but the critters they eat too.
Zooplankton — small creatures such as jellyfish and krill — make up about 40 per cent of the world's marine biomass and are eaten by small fish.
And the zooplankton mostly eat phytoplankton, which get smaller in warmer oceans.
University of Sunshine Coast mathematician Ryan Heneghan said this change in the size of phytoplankton could lead to less zooplankton overall.


Warming oceans could result in a change in the amount and type of zooplankton, which is eaten by fish. (Supplied: Dr Lisa Gershwin)
There could be a shift in zooplankton towards species that have lower carbon content, he added.
"For fish which are eating the zooplankton, that then has knock-on effects in terms of the quality of their diet.
"And then big fish eat the small fish and you keep going up."


Whales fatten up on krill in Antarctic waters before the winter migration north. (Supplied: Olaf Meynecke)
Dr Heneghan's research showed that under a high emissions scenario of about 4 to 5C of warming, fish biomass around the world could drop by 10 per cent.
He said the impact of shifts in zooplankton species had been seen already during marine heatwaves.
"There was a big heatwave off the coast of California ... called The Blob in 2016," Dr Heneghan said.
"Temperatures were elevated for a few years ... and then what the follow on from that was not just reduced fish biomass, but it was reproductive failure in fish communities and those sorts of things."


https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2023-10-11/climate-overshoot-loss-fish-habitat-irreversible-warming/102940790


Abc news 2
Government promises to cut emissions to reach net zero by 2050 under new climate change plan
Australia has its hopes pinned on technologies that don't yet exist to achieve the federal government's pledge to join the bulk of the developed word in pursuing net zero emissions by 2050.
Key points:
* The plan relies on investment in a range of "low emissions" technologies and "ultra-low-cost" solar
* Australia is on track to cut emissions by 30 to 35 per cent by 2030
* The government estimates the plan will create 62,000 jobs in regional mining and heavy industry
The Prime Minister on Tuesday released a long-awaited plan to pursue the goal, just days before flying to a global climate change conference in Glasgow, Scotland, where he's expected to face pressure to do more to tackle climate change.
It comes after weeks of bitter debate within the Coalition, with Nationals only on Sunday deciding they would back the net zero commitment, a policy the government opposed at the last election.
The majority of the partyroom have backed net zero despite sources saying its leader, Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce, had told the meeting he was personally against the proposal.
The government's commitment to reach net zero means that, by 2050, the amount of carbon dioxide Australia is removing from the atmosphere will have to be the same as, or more than, the amount it is emitting.
The plan for net zero
Photo shows Wind turbines are set to dot the landscape in Victoria's west


The government has committed to reaching net zero by 2050, and says it is on track to beat its 2030 emissions targets. But what will it take to turn Australia green?
Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Australia would set on a path to achieve that by investing more than $20 billion in "low emissions technologies" in the next decade.
They include soil carbon sequestration — where carbon is removed from the atmosphere and stored in soil — carbon capture and storage (CCS), production of low-emission steel, and other ways to reduce energy use.
The plan also includes using "clean hydrogen" to lower fuel emissions and a "new priority" for the government to deliver "ultra-low-cost solar" power below $15 per megawatt-hour.
Hydrogen is seen by the government as a potentially zero-emission fuel, but getting it in a pure and useable form involves processes that can produce a lot of emissions.
Has Video Duration: 5 minutes 50 seconds.
Watch 5m


Is green hydrogen the fuel of the future?
Only "green" hydrogen is produced entirely through renewable power and has zero emissions. The government's plan for "clean hydrogen" will see fuel made using both renewables and energy from gas.
As for CCS, while the government believes real progress is being made on the technologies involved, many climate scientists believe it is not a serious alternative to wind and solar power.
The Climate Council has said using it would be an attempt to prolong the use of fossil fuels.


A comparison of production process for the "blue" and "green" types of hydrogen. (Supplied: Woodside)
The combination of the government's selected technologies is expected to reduce emissions by 85 per cent, with the remaining 15 per cent to be achieved through future technologies.
"That 15 per cent will come from the evolution and momentum that is generated by those earlier technological developments," Mr Morrison said.
However, unlike the existing commitment to cut emissions by 2030, the net zero by 2050 target will not be enshrined in law.
Mr Morrison has previously said reducing emissions relies on technology and not "political commitments".
Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese criticised the plan, saying it contained no new policies.
"Scott Morrison left it to the last possible minute to outline a scam that leaves everything to the last possible minute," he said.
"The word plan doesn't constitute a plan, no matter how often [Mr Morrison] said it.
"As always, with this Prime Minister, it is all about marketing."
Why is pressure on Australia over climate?
This week has seen the UK, the US and others pile onto Australia during a virtual conference on climate action. Why now? 
Shadow Energy Minister Chris Bowen said he had  "seen more detail in fortune cookies".
"It requires leadership and detailed plans but all we have today was the slides, slogans and not solutions," he said.
On track to beat 2030 target, PM says
The latest projections show Australia is on track to cut emissions by 30 to 35 per cent by 2030.
However, Mr Morrison said the formal target of a 26 to 28 per cent reduction would remain unchanged.
Energy Minister Angus Taylor said the jump in forecast emissions reductions was in large part because of the "rapid" uptake of solar energy.
"We are world leaders in solar," he said.
"One in four houses [have it]. No other country in the world is at that level."
"We have seen extraordinary investments, world-beating investments in renewables increasingly dominated by solar in the last couple of years, and that has played an important role."
Mr Taylor said improving energy efficiency and changes to land use in agricultural areas were the other major factors behind the 2030 improvement and also flagged that Australia was on track to beat those targets without wide-reaching legislation from the federal government.
Mr Morrison will attend the United Nations COP26 climate conference in Glasgow next week where he will confirm the government's net zero position.


The government's plan forecasts emissions reductions across multiple industries. (Supplied: Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources)
Speaking to 7.30, Mr Taylor made sure to emphasise the difference between net zero and "absolute zero".
"If your goal is absolute zero, you want to wipe out any industry with any emissions; that means agriculture, that means mining, that means fossil fuels, they have all got to go," he said.
"Our goal is net zero, and net zero means that we can still have an agriculture sector, we're still going to have gas as an important part of the mix for many, many years to come.
"That's appropriate because you simply can't wipe these industries out and expect that the economy can keep functioning, jobs can continue to be created, we can have the balance in the electricity grid that we need."
Government says jobs will be created in mining, heavy industry
The plan came after the Nationals confirmed they would give "in-principle" support to the target earlier this week, after lengthy negotiations.
The Nationals and the real climate decision makers
Photo shows An elderly man in a blue jacket and white shirt makes a point at TV interview with man and woman behind


The Nationals' decision to endorse a carbon emissions reduction target exposes a party with policies at odds with key constituents, writes Ian Verrender.
The government is estimating 62,000 jobs will be created in regional mining and heavy industry jobs, as the global demand for metals used in renewable technology and natural gas — what it describes as a "critical transition fuel" — continues to increase.
As part of the deal to secure the Nationals support, the Productivity Commission will review the new plan every five years to measure the impact reducing emissions has on regional communities.
"That will monitor the impact, the socio-economic impact, of our plans into the future," Mr Morrison said.
"So I can say to rural and regional Australians this is a good plan for you. It's a good plan for all Australians."
Mr Taylor said the plan reflected the fact that customer and investor demands were changing and the government needed to adapt to meet those needs.
He described the plan as an "actively achievable pathway".


https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-10-26/government-commits-to-net-zero-by-2050-climate-deal/100565254


Abc news 3


Great Barrier Reef facing another severe bleaching event ahead of UN delegation visit


The Great Barrier Reef is being hit with a widespread and severe bleaching event, just three days before a United Nations delegation is due to arrive to assess the health of the world heritage area.
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) confirmed the bleaching is widespread in both the far north and the central sections of the reef, with the bleaching in the central parts rated as "severe".
Surveys are still underway to assess the full extent of the damage.
The last serious bleaching event on the reef occurred just two years ago.
This article contains external content that failed to load. It may have been removed or is no longer available.
The Reef Authority's chief scientist, David Wachenfeld, said the situation was "concerning".
"In the areas of central Great Barrier Reef where heat stress has been the worst over this summer, we are starting to see some coral mortality," Professor Wachenfeld said.
Widespread serious bleaching was not seen until 1998, but with soaring greenhouse gas emissions heating the globe, it appears to now be a common occurrence.
Mass bleaching was again seen in 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020.
Professor Wachenfeld told the ABC the GBRMPA would not officially declare a "mass bleaching event" until they were able to examine all the data.
"There certainly is a risk that we are seeing a mass bleaching event," he said.
Bleaching occurs when the water is too warm, for too long. The coral expels the algae living inside it, leaving it colourless. The algae also provides the coral with most of its energy. If temperatures don't return to normal, the coral dies.
Reefs can recover from bleaching, but it takes years. If bleaching occurs regularly, the reef ecosystem can collapse.
Environmental groups have again called on the federal government to increase its ambitions for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions in line with a warming trajectory that is consistent with the reef surviving.
2022 a coral bleaching 'first', professor says
This bleaching is occurring in the midst of a La Niña weather pattern, which usually brings cooler temperatures, as well as cloud and rain, which protects the reef from bleaching.
"Corals on the Great Barrier Reef are not supposed to bleach in cooler La Niña summers," James Cook University's Professor Terry Hughes said on Twitter.
"2022 is a first, thanks to anthropogenic heating. It's been a mere 24 years since the first 1998 mass bleaching occurred during an El Niño heatwave."
Lissa Schindler from the Australian Marine Conservation Society agreed.
"It shows the consistent pressure our Reef is now under from global heating," Dr Schindler said.
"A healthy reef can recover from coral bleaching but it needs time. Regular marine heatwaves caused by the burning of coal and gas means it is not getting this time."
Richard Leck from World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) Australia said the sixth significant bleaching event showed the reef was in grave danger.
"That's four times since 2016. The reef is now suffering widespread bleaching damage at the rate of more than once every two years," Mr Leck said.
Do you know more about this story? Email Specialist.Team@abc.net.au
A spokesperson for Environment Minister Sussan Ley said: "Any time we see bleaching it is a concern and it is why we are investing an additional $1 billion in the reef, to strengthen its resilience in the face of these challenges.
"This is the best-managed reef in the world and as a result of our collaborations with scientists, reef managers, traditional owners, farmers and local communities it is also the most closely monitored."
UN delegation visiting the reef soon
The official announcement from GBRMPA comes just days before the UN World Heritage Centre's monitoring mission arrives in Australia to assess whether the reef should be added to the list of World Heritage In Danger. 
The monitoring mission, which arrives on Sunday, was established after Ms Ley complained that UNESCO's recommendation to add the reef to the in-danger list occurred without such a mission taking place.
Ms Ley's office has not confirmed whether the mission will be taken to see any of the bleaching, or whether they will only see unbleached coral.
When asked, a spokesperson said: "The mission will have access to all aspects of the reef it requires to complete its work."
Calls for Australia to step up on emissions reductions
When UNESCO last year recommended the Great Barrier Reef be put on the list of World Heritage In Danger, one of the key issues was Australia's weak emissions reductions targets.
It warned "accelerated action at all possible levels is required to address the threat from climate change in accordance with the Paris Agreement".
In the recommendation, UNESCO said it "strongly invites" Australia to take action on climate change that was consistent with protecting the Great Barrier Reef.
It also noted, specifically, that keeping warming at 1.5C above pre-industrial levels would significantly reduce the risks of climate change to the reef.
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, even if the world follows a low-emissions pathway, we are likely to see bleaching conditions on the reef every year by the middle of the century.
"We really need the strongest and fastest possible global action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in order to secure a better future for the the Great Barrier Reef," Professor Wachenfeld said.
ld Heritage Committee when it made the decision not to immediately list the reef as in-danger.
"Coral bleaching is directly attributable to climate change caused by rising global emissions. Reducing Australia's domestic and exported emissions fast, this decade, is the main solution within our control," he said.
WWF-Australia commissioned an analysis by two leading climate scientists from the University of Melbourne, examining the gap between Australia's targets and a pathway consistent with stopping warming at 1.5C.
It found Australia's targets meant we would emit more than twice as much greenhouse gas as is possible for Australia to remain consistent with the 1.5C pathway.
"There is a clear gap between the emissions reduction consistent with limiting warming to 1.5C and Australia's emissions targets," said Professor Malte Meinshausen, one of the authors on the report.


https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-03-18/queensland-great-barrier-reef-facing-another-bleaching-event/100917656?utm_source=abc_news_web&utm_medium=content_shared&utm_campaign=abc_news_web


Abc news 4
Earth's hottest year was 2023. Here it is in graphs and photos
While 2023 has already been called the world's hottest year, the full set of climate data up to December 31 shows global temperatures reached "exceptionally" high levels last year, according to the European Union's key climate service.
Overnight, the Copernicus Climate Change Service (CCCS) released its official summary of global climatic conditions in 2023.
It found Earth was 1.48 degrees Celsius warmer than pre-industrial levels, with temperatures during the year overtaking the previous record set in 2016 by a large margin.
It is also likely to have exceeded those of any period in at least the past 100,000 years, according to its deputy director Samantha Burgess.
"2023 was an exceptional year with climate records tumbling like dominoes," she said.
So, in an exceptional year, what did things look like on the ground?
Here's a glimpse of some of the defining events from the world's hottest year in pictures and charts.
World temperature anomaly
According to the CCCS, the annual average air temperatures were the warmest on record, or close to the warmest, over the majority of ocean basins and continents around the world, except Australia.
This map shows how much higher or lower surface air temperatures across each country were compared to the 1991-2020 average.


First signs in June
After a milder start to the year, the earliest signs of how unusual the year would become emerged in early June.
Every month since then — and nearly every day — has been its hottest on record, according to data from the CCCS, and the University of Maine's Climate Reanalyzer platform.
Similar records have played out in the world's oceans, beginning in March.
These unprecedented high sea surface temperature were a critical driver of the extreme air temperature in 2023, according to the CCCS.




Extreme temperature observations on the ground
The CCCS data is focused on the climate, rather than individual weather events.
But within the year there were several extreme heat events on the ground that formed part of the overall data.
Though records were set over various parts of the globe throughout the year, some of the most intense temperatures occurred during the Northern Hemisphere summer, particularly in July.
On July 16, China set a new national temperature record, reaching 52.2C at a weather station in the far north-western region of Xinjiang, according to state media.
Meanwhile, on the same day, temperatures at the Saratoga Spring station, in the Death Valley National Park, challenged all-time records, hitting 53.9C.
This was the highest temperature of 2023, according to independent climate scientist Jérôme Reynaud, who runs the GeoClimat website.


Cities across China opened their air raid shelters to offer residents relief from the unusually high temperatures across parts of the country.(Reuters/China Daily)
The extreme temperature was just a slice of the historical heatwave that stretched from California's desert into Arizona and Texas during the 2023 summer.
For 31 straight days, from the last day of June and through July, the south-west United States city of Phoenix hit 43.3C (110F), smashing the previous record of 18 consecutive days.
Thermal images show how much hotter the pavements and other urban surfaces were during that time, with medics reporting a spike in contact burns.
Before: At midday on July 26, the air temperature in downtown in Phoenix was 33C.. . After: A Flir One ProThermal camera registered a surface temperature of 65C on the road, more than double the air temperature.. .
Instructions: Use left and right arrow keys to control image transition
Before and after images
SLIDE




At midday on July 26, the air temperature in downtown in Phoenix was 33C. / A Flir One ProThermal camera registered a surface temperature of 65C on the road, more than double the air temperature.
Meanwhile in the Southern Hemisphere, Australia had its warmest winter since records began in 1910.
April also saw extremes, with many parts of Bangladesh, India, Thailand and Lao PDR experiencing record high temperatures in the last two weeks, according to World Weather Attribution, as well as Spain, Portugal, Morocco and Algeria.
Among the records, Thailand recorded its highest ever temperature of 45.4C on April 15 in the city of Tak.
Extreme bushfires
The hot temperatures set the stage for severe wildfires in the Northern Hemisphere, which played out across Canada, Russia, the United States, and Europe.
But the most significant were in Canada.
From the beginning of March, the country faced a series of ongoing, record-setting wildfires, which charred forests from British Columbia in the west, to Quebec in the east.
According to the latest public records, the Canadian wildfires of 2023 razed 18.5 million hectares of land, and released copious amounts of carbon into the atmosphere.




The intense fires led to above-average global fire emissions overall, according to the Global Carbon Budget, but were offset by below-average fire emissions from major source regions, including the tropics.
Coral bleaching
Last year also saw severe coral bleaching across parts of the globe.
Before: A flurry of activity and life at Cheeca Rocks reef in the Florida Keys before coral bleaching.. . After: It was only July when Dr Enochs noticed that colour had already drained from corals at Cheeca Rocks reef.. .
Instructions: Use left and right arrow keys to control image transition
Dr Manzello's coral bleaching timeline:
* February 2023: Mass bleaching started in Fiji and Vanuatu during La Nina conditions
* June 2023: Mass bleaching began to take off across the eastern Pacific and southern Caribbean. Mexico, El Salvador, Costa Rica, Panama, Columbia saw severe bleaching.
* Bleaching on the Caribbean side of central America (Belize, Mexico, Caribbean Panama).
* July 2023: Sea temperatures skyrocketed in Florida and the Bahamas causing severe bleaching and rapid tissue loss and mortality in certain taxa.
* Late July – August: Reports of severe bleaching in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Aqaba (Red Sea).
* August – October: The majority of the north-west Atlantic region experienced record-setting heat stress and bleaching.
In the Florida Keys area in July, surface ocean temperatures soared to hot-tub temperatures, hitting 38.4C in Manatee Bay.
The heat stress was so severe in Florida and the wider Caribbean that NOAA's Coral Reef Watch had to add additional alert levels.
Ian Enochs, the head of the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory's (AOML) Coral Program, said he had "never seen anything like" last year's bleaching event.
"When we jumped in at the site [Cheeca Rocks], it was completely bleached, and in fact, you could see it from the surface," Dr Enochs said.
"Absolutely everything was bleached, stark white, severely paled.
"And those were just the hard corals, the soft corals, the sea fans ... they hadn't just bleached, they had disintegrated."
But he said some corals were "thankfully" showing signs of recovery already.
"The fact that we have corals there still and that some of them are recovering, I find encouraging, in the midst of a really depressing, very difficult, very hard to observe summer," he said.
There was no bleaching in Australia in 2023, but Dr Manzello said the Great Barrier Reef and other parts of Australia face risk of bleaching over the next month or so.


Ian Enochs described the Cheeca Rocks as "stark white" and "severely paled" after the bleaching event.(Supplied: AOML)
Extreme rainfall
Several record-setting rainfall events also took place during the year.
This included the extreme rainfall triggered by powerful Typhoon Doksuri in China during July, which killed dozens and left a trail of destruction as it stretched as far north as the Chinese capital Beijing and the surrounding province of Hebei.
Georgia Institute of Technology climate scientist Annalisa Bracco said it was "very plausible" that the intensely warm ocean temperatures aided several of these events, although formal studies would be required to confirm it.


Five-sigma event in Antarctica
In its summary, the CCCS also noted how "remarkable" 2023 was for Antarctic sea ice, which reached record low extents for eight of twelve months of the year.
It included an all-time low in February, and a record low winter maximum in September.
In July, physical oceanographer Edward Doddridge described the unfolding event as "gobsmacking".
"For those of you who are interested in statistics, this is a five-sigma event. So it's five standard deviations beyond the mean. Which means that if nothing had changed, we'd expect to see a winter like this about once every 7.5 million years," he said.
In December, however, the daily sea ice extent shifted closer to average which was described as "really good news" by CCCS deputy director Dr Burgess. 
But she said it remained to be seen whether this was a short or long term trend.


Antarctic sea ice fell to record lows in 2023.(Supplied: Australian Antarctic Division)
Hot year surprising to climate scientists
The fate of 2023 was known for some time before the year's end, with climate agencies around the world reporting in October that 2023 would very likely become Earth's warmest on record.
However, Berkeley Earth climate scientist Zeke Hausfather said 2023 was not initially expected to be so hot.
"The beginning of the year was on the cool side due to a lingering and rare triple dip La Niña event, and a developing El Niño later in the year was expected to impact 2024 more than 2023," he said.
How did Australia's climate stack up in 2023?
The world just recorded its hottest ever year, globally, but what was the climate like in Australia during 2023?



Read more
Dr Hausfather said the extremities of temperatures witnessed had also been surprising, with its exact causes uncertain.
"We are not sure why we have seen such exceptional temperatures in the summer of 2023 – temperatures that would be not unexpected after the peak of a strong El Niño event, but occurred while the El Niño was still in its earlier stages," he said.
He said either the El Niño was behaving differently to recent analogues potentially because of its rapid transition out of extended La Niña conditions, or there were other factors at play.
"That being said, the other factors that we know of [such as] the Tonga eruption in 2022, the marine sulphur fuel phase-out in 2020, an uptick in the 11-year solar cycle, are all far too small in effect to explain the anomaly this year," he said.
"Of course, the level of heat we are seeing this year would be effectively impossible without the approximate 1.3C of warming the world has experienced to-date due to human emissions of CO2, other greenhouse gases, and aerosols."
CCCS director Carlo Buontempo said unless the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere was stabilised, we could not expect a different result in future years from those we'd seen in recent months.
"On the contrary, following the current trajectory, the record-breaking year of 2023 will probably we remembered as a cool year."
The top 10 warmest years on record have all occurred since 2010.
What could be in store for 2024?
What exactly is in store for 2024 is still unknown.
This article contains external content that failed to load. It may have been removed or is no longer available.
Dr Hausfather said, all things being equal, climate scientists would expect 2024 to be warmer than 2023, based on the global temperatures analogues of previous El Niño events.
However, he said the past year had been so anomalous that he was less certain that would play out.
"I find myself agreeing with [climate scientist] Gavin Schmidt's assessment that 2024 is slightly favoured to edge out 2023 but hardly certain," he said.
Dr Bracco said she also expected 2024 to see continued warmth into 2024.
"We were coming from a series of La Niña years, and unfortunately a 'jump' up had to happen. It was stronger than I would have liked," she said.
"Hopefully, it has helped realising we must do something quickly."
For the world's coral reefs, researchers believe the widespread marine heatwaves from 2023 will likely be a precursor to a global mass bleaching and mortality event over the next 12 to 24 months.


https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-01-10/2023-earths-hottest-year-on-record/103258396


The conversation 1
New federal wildfire plan is ambitious – but the Forest Service needs more money and people to fight the growing risks
Published: January 26, 2022 1.27pm GMT
People living in the western U.S. have been concerned about wildfires for a long time, but the past two years have left many of them fearful and questioning whether any solutions to the fire crisis truly exist.
The Dixie Fire in the Sierra Nevada burned nearly 1 million acres in 2021, including almost the entire community of Greenville, California. Then strong winds near Lake Tahoe sent the Caldor Fire racing toward homes, forcing the evacuation of tens of thousands of people – including one of us. They followed destructive wildfires in 2020 in California, and Colorado and Oregon also saw devastating fires in the past two years.
As foresters who have been working on wildfire and forest restoration issues in the Sierra Nevada for over a quarter of a century, the main lesson we gather from how these fires have burned is that fuels reduction and forest restoration projects are our best tools for mitigating wildfire impacts amid a changing climate, and not nearly enough of them are being done.
A new 10-year plan announced by the U.S. Forest Service in early 2022 aims to change that. It outlines an ambitious strategy, but Congress will now have to follow through with enough funding to carry it out.
Fuels reduction projects can work
The Dixie and Caldor fires provided evidence that forest fuels reduction projects can work.
The fires spread quickly over vast areas, but both burned less severely in areas with proactive forest restoration and fuels management projects, including near South Lake Tahoe and near Quincy.
Fuels reduction projects include thinning out trees, burning off woody debris and reducing “ladder fuels” like small trees and brush that can allow fire to reach the tree canopy. Forest restoration projects focus on forest structure, density and composition as well as reducing fuels.
So far, Congress has approved additional funding through the 2021 infrastructure bill, which included about $655 million a year for fire management for five years. That’s in addition to the Forest Service’s annual funding for this work, which was about $260 million this fiscal year.
But in California alone, a group of scientists, land managers and former government leaders has recommended spending $5 billion a year on proactive management, roughly equivalent to what was spent to suppress fires in the state in 2020. Known as “The Venado Declaration,” this proposal, championed by former Gov. Jerry Brown and former Cal Fire Director Ken Pimlott, calls for addressing forest resiliency on every acre and acknowledges that more than just funding is needed. It also discusses building infrastructure and a workforce and reevaluating regulatory barriers.
Four key steps
To manage fires in an era of climate change, when drier, hotter weather creates ideal conditions for burning, experts estimate that the area treated for fuels reduction needs to increase by at least an order of magnitude. We believe government needs to accomplish these four things to succeed:
1) Drastically increase funding and staff for agencies’ fuels reduction projects, as well as outreach, cost-sharing and technical assistance for private forestland owners. The new plan is a good start. Funding more federal and state agency positions would add forest restoration capacity for the long term. The Biden administration’s proposal for a Civilian Climate Corps could also bring in more young workers.
  

During the Dixie Fire, firefighters used an area that had been strategically thinned to set backfires to prevent the wildfire from reaching Quincy. Ryan Tompkins, CC BY-ND
2) Reduce regulations on forest and fuels management efforts for both public and private land. While California and the federal government have made recent strides to streamline regulations, land management agencies need to acknowledge the biggest risk is doing nothing. Agencies need to plan larger restoration projects and drastically cut the time needed to implement them.
3) Invest in communities’ capacity to carry out local forest restoration work by providing long-term support to local organizations that provide outreach, technical assistance and project coordination services. Funding restoration through competitive grants makes development of long-term community capacity challenging at best. The new plan’s inclusion of state, tribal and private lands is an opportunity for partnerships.
4) Provide funds and financial incentives for at-risk communities to retrofit homes to withstand wildfires and reduce fuels around homes, communities and infrastructure.
Amid a changing climate, we will have to learn to coexist with wildfires in the U.S. West. This will require concerted action and a cultural shift in how we view and manage our forests and communities to be resilient.




https://theconversation.com/new-federal-wildfire-plan-is-ambitious-but-the-forest-service-needs-more-money-and-people-to-fight-the-growing-risks-175639?utm_medium=article_native_share&utm_source=theconversation.com


The conversation 2
Old forests are critically important for slowing climate change and merit immediate protection from logging
Published: January 19, 2024 1.40pm GMT
Forests are an essential part of Earth’s operating system. They reduce the buildup of heat-trapping carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from fossil fuel combustion, deforestation and land degradation by 30% each year. This slows global temperature increases and the resulting changes to the climate. In the U.S., forests take up 12% of the nation’s greenhouse gas emissions annually and store the carbon long term in trees and soils.
Mature and old-growth forests, with larger trees than younger forests, play an outsized role in accumulating carbon and keeping it out of the atmosphere. These forests are especially resistant to wildfires and other natural disturbances as the climate warms.
Most forests in the continental U.S. have been harvested multiple times. Today, just 3.9% of timberlands across the U.S., in public and private hands, are over 100 years old, and most of these areas hold relatively little carbon compared with their potential.
The Biden administration is moving to improve protection for old-growth and mature forests on federal land, which we see as a welcome step. But this involves regulatory changes that will likely take several years to complete. Meanwhile, existing forest management plans that allow logging of these important old, large trees remain in place.
As scientists who have spent decades studying forest ecosystems and the effects of climate change, we believe that it is essential to start protecting carbon storage in these forests. In our view, there is ample scientific evidence to justify an immediate moratorium on logging mature and old-growth forests on federal lands.
Remote sensing data from space is a new tool for estimating forest growth and density.
Federal action to protect mature and old-growth forests
A week after his inauguration in 2021, President Joe Biden issued an executive order that set a goal of conserving at least 30% of U.S. lands and waters by 2030 to address what the order called “a profound climate crisis.” In 2022, Biden recognized the climate importance of mature and old-growth forests for a healthy climate and called for conserving them on federal lands.
Most recently, in December 2023, the U.S. Forest Service announced that it was evaluating the effects of amending management plans for 128 U.S. national forests to better protect mature and old-growth stands – the first time any administration has taken this kind of action.
These actions seek to make existing old-growth forests more resilient; preserve ecological benefits that they provide, such as habitat for threatened and endangered species; establish new areas where old-growth conditions can develop; and monitor the forests’ condition over time. The amended national forest management plans also would prohibit logging old-growth trees for mainly economic purposes – that is, producing timber. Harvesting trees would be permitted for other reasons, such as thinning to reduce fire severity in hot, dry regions where fires occur more frequently.
Remarkably, however, logging is hardly considered in the Forest Service’s initial analysis, although studies show that it causes greater carbon losses than wildfires and pest infestations.
In one analysis across 11 western U.S. states, researchers calculated total aboveground tree carbon loss from logging, beetle infestations and fire between 2003 and 2012 and found that logging accounted for half of it. Across the states of California, Oregon and Washington, harvest-related carbon emissions between 2001 and 2016 averaged five times the emissions from wildfires.
A 2016 study found that nationwide, between 2006 and 2010, total carbon emissions from logging were comparable to emissions from all U.S. coal plants, or to direct emissions from the entire building sector.



Logging pressure
Federal lands are used for multiple purposes, including biodiversity and water quality protection, recreation, mining, grazing and timber production. Sometimes, these uses can conflict with one another – for example, conservation and logging..
Legal mandates to manage land for multiple uses do not explicitly consider climate change, and federal agencies have not consistently factored climate change science into their plans. Early in 2023, however, the White House Council on Environmental Quality directed federal agencies to consider the effects of climate change when they propose major federal actions that significantly affect the environment.
Multiple large logging projects on public land clearly qualify as major federal actions, but many thousands of acres have been legally exempted from such analysis.
Across the western U.S., just 20% of relatively high-carbon forests, mostly on federal lands, are protected from logging and mining. A study in the lower 48 states found that 76% of mature and old-growth forests on federal lands are vulnerable to logging. Harvesting these forests would release about half of their aboveground tree carbon into the atmosphere within one or two decades.
An analysis of 152 national forests across North America found that five forests in the Pacific Northwest had the highest carbon densities, but just 10% to 20% of these lands were protected at the highest levels. The majority of national forest area that is mature and old growth is not protected from logging, and current management plans include logging of some of the largest trees still standing.
Letting old trees grow
Conserving forests is one of the most effective and lowest-cost options for managing atmospheric carbon dioxide, and mature and old-growth forests do this job most effectively. Protecting and expanding them does not require expensive or complex energy-consuming technologies, unlike some other proposed climate solutions.
Allowing mature and old-growth forests to continue growing will remove from the air and store the largest amount of atmospheric carbon in the critical decades ahead. The sooner logging of these forests ceases, the more climate protection they can provide.


https://theconversation.com/old-forests-are-critically-important-for-slowing-climate-change-and-merit-immediate-protection-from-logging-220771?utm_medium=article_native_share&utm_source=theconversation.com




The conversation 3
As coastal flooding worsens, some cities are retreating from the water
Published: July 16, 2021 1.27pm 
When the tide gets exceptionally high in Charleston, South Carolina, coastal streets start to run with seawater. Some yards become ponds, and residents pull on rain boots.
The city also gets a lot of rain. After homes in one low-lying neighborhood flooded three times in four years, the city offered to buy out 32 flood-prone town homes and turn the land back into open space that can be used for managing future floodwater. It’s a strategy coastal cities from Virginia to California are contemplating more often as tidal flooding increases with sea level rise.
Cities all along the U.S. coasts have seen high-tide flooding days increase. In 2021, the U.S. coasts are projected to see an average of three to seven high-tide flooding days, rising to 25-75 days by midcentury, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration warns in its annual high-tide flooding outlook, released July 14, 2021.
Low-lying Charleston saw a record-breaking 14 days of high-tide flooding in 2020, and parts of the city count even more flood days. The city is considering new sea walls to protect against hurricanes, and other measures to try to keep tidal and storm flooding out of threatened neighborhoods. It is elevating some homes. And it has started helping resident relocate away from high-risk areas. It’s a strategy known as managed retreat – the purposeful movement of people, buildings and other infrastructure away from highly hazardous places.
Managed retreat is controversial, particularly in the United States. But it isn’t just about moving – it’s about adapting to change and building communities that are safer, addressing long-overlooked needs and incorporating new technologies and thoughtful design for living and working in today’s world.
We argue in a special issue of the journal Science that managed retreat is an opportunity to preserve the essential while redesigning high-risk areas in ways that are better for everyone.
What managed retreat can look like
U.S. Marine Corps Gen. Oliver P. Smith famously said of a retreat he led during the Korean War: “Retreat! Hell! We’re just advancing in a different direction.” Like Gen. Smith’s maneuver, retreat from climate change-related hazards, at its core, is about choosing a new direction.
Managed retreat could involve turning streets into canals in coastal cities. It could mean purchasing and demolishing flood-prone properties to create open spaces for stormwater parks that absorb heavy rains or retention ponds and pumping stations.



Managed retreat is one part of an adaptation toolkit. Elena Hartley
In some cases, managed retreat may involve building denser, more affordable housing that’s designed to stay cool, while leaving open spaces for recreation or agriculture that can also reduce heat and absorb stormwater when needed.
Managing retreat well is challenging. It affects numerous people – the residents who relocate, their neighbors who remain, and the communities where they move – and each may be affected differently. Soldiers Grove, Wisconsin, relocated its flood-prone business district in the late 1970s and used the opportunity to heat the new buildings with solar energy, earning the nickname “Solar Village.” The move reinvigorated the local economy; yet while the project is hailed as a success, some residents still miss the old town. For managed retreat to be a viable strategy, relocation plans must not only help people move to safer ground but also meet their needs. This may involve a wide range of social issues, including cultural practices, affordable housing, building codes, land use, jobs, transportation and utilities.
Since high-risk areas are often home to low-income communities and Black, Indigenous and other communities of color, addressing climate risk in these areas may also require addressing a national legacy of racism, segregation and disinvestment that has put these communities at risk and left many with few choices to address floods, fires and other hazards.
At its simplest, managed retreat can be a lifeline for families who are tired of the emotional and financial stress of rebuilding after floods or fires but cannot afford to sell their home at a loss or don’t want to sell and put another family at risk.
Talking about managed retreat
Even if an individual or community decides not to retreat, thinking critically and talking openly about managed retreat can help people understand why remaining in place is important, and what risks they are willing to face in order to stay.
The losses involved in moving can be obvious, including cost, but there are losses to staying in place, too: physical risk of future hazards, increased emotional and financial stress, potential loss of community if some residents or businesses leave to find safer ground, pain from watching the environment change and lost opportunities to improve.
If people can articulate why it is important to remain in place, they can make better plans.
Maybe it is important to stay because a building is historic and people want to protect that history. That opens up creative conversations about the ways people have preserved risk-prone historic buildings and sites. And it invites others to help document that heritage and educate the community, perhaps though oral histories, video records or 3D models.
Maybe it is important for owners to stay because the land has been in the family for generations. That could kick-start conversations with the next generation about their goals for the land, which may include preservation but may also include changes.
Maybe a deep, emotional attachment to a community or home could make a person want to stay. Conversations could focus on moving nearby – to a new house that’s safer but still part of the community – or physically relocating the house to a safer place. It could also mean finding strategies, like life estates, that allow people to stay in their home as long as they want but would prevent a new family from moving in and putting their kids at risk.
If the local economy depends on the beach, that could start a conversation about why moving back from the beach can be the best way to save the beach and its ecosystem, to prevent walls from narrowing it and to maintain public access without homes on stilts hovering over the tide.
Thinking carefully about what parts of our lives and communities should stay the same opens space to think creatively about what parts should or could change.




https://theconversation.com/as-coastal-flooding-worsens-some-cities-are-retreating-from-the-water-164463?utm_medium=article_native_share&utm_source=theconversation.com






The conversation 4


Maui’s deadly wildfires burn through Lahaina – it’s a reminder of the growing risk to communities that once seemed safe


Wildfires, pushed by powerful winds, raced through Lahaina, Hawaii, on Aug. 8 and 9, 2023, leaving a charred and smoldering landscape across the tourist town of about 13,000 residents that was once the capital of the Kingdom of Hawaii. Nearly 100 people are believed to have died in the fires, Maui County officials said. Others were rescued by the U.S. Coast Guard after going into the ocean to escape the flames.
Dry grasses and strong winds, influenced by Hurricane Dora passing far to the south, heightened the risk as wildfires burned both in Maui’s tourist-filled west coast and farther inland and on the Big Island of Hawaii.
Most fires in the U.S. are suppressed before they have a chance to threaten communities, but the winds were too strong to send helicopters into the sky to help contain Maui’s fires on the first day, leaving firefighters to battle the blazes from the ground.
Lt. Gov. Sylvia Luke issued an emergency declaration, activating the National Guard to help, and urged travelers to stay away.
Fires have become an increasing risk in many areas of the U.S. that people once considered safe.
Over the past two decades, a staggering 21.8 million Americans found themselves living within 3 miles (5 kilometers) of a large wildfire. Nearly 600,000 of them were directly exposed to the fire, with their homes inside the wildfire perimeter. That number – people directly exposed to wildfires – more than doubled from 2000 to 2019, my team’s recent research shows.
But while commentators often blame the rising risk on homebuilders pushing deeper into the wildland areas, we found that the population growth in these high-risk areas explained only a small part of the increase in the number of people who were exposed to wildfires.
Instead, three-quarters of this trend was driven by intense fires growing out of control and encroaching on existing communities.
That knowledge has implications for how communities prepare to fight wildfires in the future, how they respond to population growth and whether policy changes such as increasing insurance premiums to reduce losses will be effective.
What climate change has to do with wildfires
Hot, dry weather pulls moisture from plants and soil, leaving dry fuel that can easily burn. On a windy day, a spark from a power line, campfire or lightning can start a wildfire that quickly spreads.
Recent research on California’s fires found that almost all of the increase in that state’s burned area in recent decades was due to anthropogenic climate change – meaning climate change caused by human activities.
Our new research looked beyond just the area burned and asked: Where were people exposed to wildfires, and why?
Where wildfire exposure was highest
I am a climate scientist who studies the wildfire-climate relationship and its socioenvironmental impacts. Colleagues and I analyzed the boundaries of more than 15,000 large wildfires across the lower 48 states and annual population distribution data to estimate the number of people exposed to those fires.
If you picture wildfire photos taken from a plane, fires generally burn in patches rather than as a wall of flame. Pockets of homes within the fire boundary survive, but many also burn.
While the population has grown in the wildland-urban interface – the region where houses intermingle with forests, shrublands or grasslands – we found that population growth accounted for only about one-quarter of the increase in the number of humans directly exposed to wildfires across the lower 48 states from 2000 to 2019.
Three-quarters of the 125% increase in exposure was due to fires increasingly encroaching on existing communities. The total burned area increased only 38%, but the locations of intense fires near towns and cities put lives at risk.
In California, the state with the most people exposed to fires, several wildfire catastrophes hit communities that had existed long before 2000. Almost all these catastrophes occurred during dry, hot, windy conditions that have become increasingly frequent because of climate change.


What communities can do to lower the risk
Studies have shown that even in conservative scenarios, the amount of area that burns in Western wildfires is projected to grow in the next few decades.
How much these fires grow and how intense they become depends largely on warming trends. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions will help slow warming. But communities will also have to adapt to more wildfires. Developing community-level wildfire response plans, reducing human ignitions of wildfires and improving zoning and building codes can help prevent fires from becoming destructive.


https://theconversation.com/mauis-deadly-wildfires-burn-through-lahaina-its-a-reminder-of-the-growing-risk-to-communities-that-once-seemed-safe-211317?utm_medium=article_native_share&utm_source=theconversation.com




The guardian 1
A look back at 12 months of key summits, devastating weather and alarming discoveries
By Bibi van der Zee
Fri 31 Dec 2021 12.44 GMT
Share
January
The year began with a counting up of the damage after the catastrophic extreme weather events of 2020, from fires to floods. Looking at the US alone, California more than doubled its previous annual wildfire record with more than 1.7m hectares (4.1m acres) burned and Nasa concluded that 2020 had been the joint hottest year on record. The US’s Noaa and the UK Met Office put it in close second to 2016.
And 2021 – the year that would see the crucial UN climate summit held in Glasgow in November – was not showing signs of being much better. The continent of Africa had its warmest January on record, while torrential rains fell in Malaysia, leading to the evacuation of 50,000 people and the death of at least six. Meanwhile in Turkey there were fears that Istanbul would run out of water following the most severe drought in a decade.
Residents in Sementeh, near Lanchang in Malaysia’s Pahang state are evacuated on a digger. Photograph: Mohd Rasfan/AFP/Getty Images
But there were small steps of progress on other fronts. Within hours of becoming president, Joe Biden announced that the US would be rejoining the Paris agreement. The Israeli company StoreDot announced that car batteries that could be fully charged in five minutes had been produced in a Chinese factory for the first time.
In my view, we’ve already waited too long to deal with this climate crisis and we can’t wait any longer. We see it with our own eyes, we feel it, we know it in our bones, and it’s time to act.
Joe Biden
And in the UK a plan to reintroduce white-tailed eagles to the east of the country was, unusually, led by farmers, who said they wanted to “inspire people with nature and drive wider nature recovery”.
February
The internationally renowned scientist James Hansen waded into the UK’s row over plans for a new coalmine in Cumbria, saying it showed “contemptuous disregard for the future of young people”. A few days earlier, nine activists had announced that they were in a tunnel under London’s Euston station, dug secretly beneath a tent, in order to protest against the high-speed rail link the UK government was in the process of building.
Protesters’ canary-shaped handwritten messages outside the Home Office during a demonstration against a proposed coalmine in Cumbria. Photograph: Alastair Grant/AP
A historic wave of winter weather hit the eastern US and Texas, with nearly 10 million people without power at the storm’s peak, and millions without water after pipes burst; it was later assessed to have been the most costly winter storm event on record.
In an amazing rewilding operation in Indonesia, 10 rescued orangutans were returned to the wild. Helicopters were used to ferry the critically endangered apes deep into the forest.
And in Madagascar scientists found what is believed to be the smallest reptile on Earth. Brookesia nana, a nano-chameleon, has a body the size of a sunflower seed, just 13.5mm long.
March
View image in fullscreen
The world’s oldest Laysan albatross, a female named Wisdom, nesting on Midway Atoll national wildlife refuge. Photograph: USFWS - Pacific Region
New York was lit up by news that dolphins had come to play in the East River – validation of a long-term clean-up of the river which had cost the city $45m. Further north, in the Midway Atoll wildlife refuge in the North Pacific, the “oldest wild bird in history”, 70-year-old Wisdom the Laysan albatross, hatched another chick. Banded by biologist Chandler Robbins in 1956, Wisdom has outlived a number of partners (albatrosses normally mate for life).
On the other side of the planet, Australia was being hit by horrendous floods, with thousands forced to flee rising waters in New South Wales, and the insurance industry facing millions of dollars in claims. The same region, meanwhile, was also battling a mouse plague, with horrifying footage showing the ground moving as the rodents took over.
In the US, Deb Haaland was confirmed as the first ever indigenous cabinet secretary, as she took over the environment department. The huge surge in renewable energy around the world continued, with China announcing that it had built windfarms with a staggering total capacity of almost 100GW in 2020 – an increase of nearly 60% on 2019. But Climate Action 100, launching the first ever benchmark for tracking corporate progress on climate change, found that only a handful of the big polluters were taking serious action.
April
A landmark legal decision by the German supreme constitutional court found that the government’s climate protection measures were insufficient to protect future generations. The government promised it would take action on what one of the young activists who had brought the case called “a huge win for the climate movement”. In the UK meanwhile, the coroner who oversaw the sad case of a young girl, Ella Kissi-Debrah, who died after an asthma attack in 2013, published a report which called for the lowering of legally binding maximum levels of particulate air pollution in the UK.
View image in fullscreen
Activists from the environmental group Fridays for Future demonstrating in Berlin’s Invalidenpark. Photograph: Fabian Sommer/AP
And in the US, a two-day summit on climate change was wound up with promises on all sides, including one from the US to cut its greenhouse gases by 50-52% by 2030. The country also pledged to double financial aid to help other countries with their targets. “Is it enough? No,” said John Kerry, Biden’s climate envoy, who had earlier struck a deal to cooperate with China on climate change. “But it’s the best we can do today and proves we can start to move.”
The shifts came against the background of a troubling development however, as scientists concluded that the warm Atlantic current linked to severe and abrupt changes in the climate in the past was now at its weakest in at least 1,600 years. The current is known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (Amoc).
Huge sandstorms in China turned the skies over Beijing yellow for several days, while Cyclone Seroja brought heavy rain and strong winds to Western Australia, with some locations seeing their highest ever daily rainfall.
May
A Dutch court ordered Royal Dutch Shell to cut its global carbon emissions by 45% by the end of 2030 in an unprecedented ruling that will have huge implications for the energy industry and other polluting multinationals. The decision came just as the International Energy Agency published Net Zero by 2050, a landmark report which stated that exploitation and development of new oil and gas fields would have to stop this year, and no new coal-fired power stations could be built if the world wanted to stay within safe limits of global heating and meet the goal of net zero emissions by 2050.
View image in fullscreen
Ava Princi, Liv Heaton, Izzy Raj-Seppings and Laura Kirwin embrace outside the federal court of Australia in Sydney. Eight young Australians and a nun sought an injunction in September 2020 to prevent the environment minister, Sussan Ley, from finally approving the Vickery coalmine extension project in north-east New South Wales. Photograph: James Gourley/AAP
Meanwhile in Australia the federal court found that the environment minister, Sussan Ley, had a duty of care to protect young people from the climate crisis, in what lawyers said was “the first time in the world” such a duty of care had been recognised.
In France, the minister for ecological transition delighted and appalled people in equal measure with the announcement that the new climate law would take meat off the menu once a week in schools.
Turkey was hit by “sea snot” – a blanket of mucus-like stuff that was silting up the coasts, created as a result of warm temperatures and agricultural run-off that encouraged phytoplankton to grow. But in California, after a short and late rainy season, the governor was declaring an impending drought emergency in 41 of 58 counties.
June
One of the most extraordinary and powerful heatwaves ever experienced by North America hit the west coast in June and did not go away. Caused by what meteorologists called a “dome of high pressure”, the heatwave extended from California – worsening the drought even as the first wildfires of the season began – all the way up to Canada, where temperatures rose up to 121.28F (49.6C), shattering all previous records. “This is the beginning of a permanent emergency,” the governor of Washington state said.
Other parts of the world also saw scorching temperatures. Both Europe and Asia had their second warmest Junes on record, while Africa and New Zealand had the warmest June ever recorded.
Smoke billows from the chimneys of Bełchatów power station in Poland. Photograph: Kacper Pempel/Reuters
But efforts to fight back continued too. Poland announced it would shut down Bełchatów, Europe’s most polluting power plant (although only in 2036). The City of London said it would be creating a heat network and digging boreholes for one of the UK’s largest low-carbon heating systems.
Sri Lanka braced itself for disaster after the MV X-Press Pearl, a ship carrying toxic chemicals, caught fire off the coast and sank. Meanwhile China was fixating on a herd of elephants that had trekked 300 miles into the city of Kunming.
July
The average global surface temperature for July was the hottest since records began in 1880, with Death Valley in California registering 54.4C (130F).
People visit the unofficial thermometer reading 56C (133F) at Furnace Creek Visitor Center on 11 July. Photograph: David Becker/Getty Images
As the US heatwaves and droughts worsened, India, China and Europe were being hit by catastrophic floods. Torrential downpours on India’s west coast led to 115 deaths, while Henan province in China saw a year’s worth of rain – 604mm – in a single day. Horrifying videos showed the waters rising in subways, while hundreds of thousands were forced to evacuate. And in Germany rows broke out when it emerged that a flood early-warning system had failed to work, after torrents of rainwater tore through villages and towns, leaving more than a hundred people dead.
Meanwhile the Australian government continued to fight attempts to have the Great Barrier Reef declared “in danger”, with local politicians saying they feared for the impact the declaration would have on jobs. In the UK, the water company Southern Water was fined a record £90m after a six-year investigation found evidence that it had deliberately poured untreated sewage into the sea in order to avoid the cost of upgrading infrastructure.
And, to top off a gloomy month for the planet, new data showed that the melting of Greenland was surging, with the amount of ice vanishing in a single day enough to cover the whole of Florida in 5cm of water, according to researchers.
August
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change delivered its starkest warning to the world yet, concluding that climate change was unequivocally caused by human activities, and warning that some of the impacts were now inevitable and “irreversible”.
As the heat continued, wildfires broke out in the Mediterranean, where the Greek prime minister described them as the country’s “greatest ecological disaster in decades”, and across more than 9m hectares of forests in Siberia.
A local resident holds an empty water hose near the village of Pefki in Greece. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images
Meanwhile floods and landslides hit Japan, where more than a million people were evacuated from their homes, and also Turkey, Colombia, and Tennessee in the US, where a record-breaking deluge swept through homes and roads. Rain fell on the highest point of the Greenland ice sheet for the first time on record.
A Swedish company shipped the world’s first customer delivery of “green steel” – made without using coal – as solar power outstripped coal in Australia for the first time when, for a fleeting moment, more electricity was generated by solar power.
In the UK, Extinction Rebellion swung back into action, blocking London Bridge and Oxford Circus, pouring red paint in entrances at the City of London and locking on outside the Science Museum over its sponsorship deal with the oil giant Shell.
September
“Blah blah blah” was what Greta Thunberg called the promises from global leaders around the world to tackle climate change, pointing out that carbon emissions were still on track to rise 16% by 2030. As Cop26 drew nearer, and following the summer of record-breaking fires, heatwaves and floods, politicians everywhere were under increasing pressure to improve their offers. A US/EU deal to reduce methane emissions felt like a good contribution.
Insulate Britain climate activists block the anticlockwise carriageway of the M25 near Ockham. Photograph: Mark Kerrison/Alamy Live News
A new protest movement launched in the UK, as Insulate Britain demonstrators began sitting on motorways to demand climate action in the form of insulation for the country’s housing stock. In Scotland, as preparations sped up, one man built an ark on a hillside, telling the planning committee when it asked if it was a permanent structure: “It’s not permanent in the same way that humanity won’t be if we don’t take action on the climate.”
In a painful irony, new data revealed that the wildfires were themselves releasing record-breaking amounts of carbon dioxide. Meanwhile, an energy crisis was breaking across the world, with sky-high gas prices in Europe and pressure on electricity and coal supplies in China.
October
China hosted the Kunming conference on biodiversity and announced a $233m (£170m) fund to protect biodiversity in developing countries.
We shall take the development of an ecological civilisation as our guide to coordinate the relationship between man and nature.
Xi Jinping
With just days to go before Cop26, Australia, one of the countries most notorious for holding out against climate action, published its plan for how it would reduce carbon emissions, but it was called “a scam” containing no detail and no modelling.
Delegates at the Green Middle East Initiative Summit in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Photograph: Saudi Green Initiative/Reuters
Elsewhere, however, signs of change were palpable, with a series of plans announced at the Middle East Green Initiative Summit, organised by Saudi Arabia. Their neighbours, the United Arab Emirates, will be hosting Cop28 in two years’ time.
A Tesla became the first ever battery-powered car to top Europe’s sales chart. And in the UK, the government was forced by a near rebellion to U-turn and place a duty on water companies to reduce sewage discharges.
In the US, one senator gained global notoriety: Joe Manchin, a conservative Democrat, was holding out against his own party for huge cuts to President Biden’s climate change plans. For a brief moment, it looked as if Biden would have to go to Cop26 with no legislative progress at home.
November
Cop26 was under way at last, after two years of pandemic, delays, worries, criticisms and negotiations. World leaders gathered for the first two days and were exhorted by David Attenborough to be “motivated by hope rather than fear”. Biden had finally got his infrastructure bill passed, but the UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, put a dampener on events by making his speech and then hopping into a private jet to make the short journey to London.
The first week saw an onslaught of deals on methane, deforestation, coal, the ambition to stick to 1.5C of warming and finance, with hundreds of the world’s biggest banks and pension funds with assets worth $130tn committing themselves to limiting greenhouse gas emissions.
Alok Sharma receives applause after giving the closing speech at Cop26 in Glasgow. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images
By the end of the second week of hard negotiation, the summit’s president, Alok Sharma, had cajoled countries into a deal including a ratchet mechanism that asked every country to upgrade its emission reduction plans in time for the next Cop in Egypt in a year’s time, and each year thereafter. However, many were dismayed that the deal did not include the loss and damage facility that most of the world had asked for, to help developing countries in particular pay for the impacts of the climate crisis already being felt.
Beyond the summit, rain storms hit British Columbia in Canada, earlier battered by the summer’s heatwaves, broke up roads and led to a state of emergency.
Out in the oceans one of the rarest animals in the world was glimpsed: the mythical white sperm whale, seen surfacing for a moment, from the waters off Jamaica.
December
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced in the middle of the month that it had recognised a new Arctic temperature record: the summer of 2020 had seen the Russian town of Verkhoyansk hit with an all-time high of 38°C (100.4°F).
Floods swept Queensland, Australia, with up to 180mm of rain falling in 24 hours in some parts of the state. The UK was hit by Storm Arwen and Storm Barra. Heavy rains fell in Iraq, leading to serious flooding and displacement. And tornadoes ripped through North America, with at least 70 deaths in Kentucky in what was described as the “most devastating tornado event” in the state’s history, only to be followed, by the end of the month, by record-breaking temperatures and snowfall.
A family walks past a destroyed church in Mayfield, Kentucky. Photograph: Brandon Bell/Getty Images
EO Wilson, who died on 26 December, had warned many times that humans could not continue to use the land and resources of the planet in the way they did. The biologist was caught up in controversies at times during his career. Nevertheless, his warning that “we live in a delusional state” if we do not understand the burden that the western way of life imposes on Earth, rings true even now.
If all mankind were to disappear, the world would regenerate back to the rich state of equilibrium that existed 10,000 years ago. If insects were to vanish, the environment would collapse into chaos.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jul/20/heavy-flooding-hits-central-china-affecting-tens-of-millions


Guardian uk 2


UK’s record hot 2022 made 160 times more likely by climate crisis
This article is more than 2 years old
Without global heating, such warm temperatures would be expected only once every five centuries, Met Office says
Damian Carrington Environment editor
Thu 5 Jan 2023 11.34 GMT
Share
The record-breaking heat in the UK in 2022 was made 160 times more likely by the climate crisis, indicating the dominant influence of human-caused global heating on Britain.
Last year has been confirmed as the UK’s hottest on record, with the average annual temperature passing the 10C mark for the first time. Scientists at the Met Office calculated that such heat is now expected every three to four years. Without the greenhouse gases emitted by humanity, such a warm year would be expected only once every five centuries.
The 10.03C recorded in 2022 beat the previous record of 9.88C set in 2014, and is 0.89C above the average of the last three decades. All the UK nations set new record annual temperatures.
Dr Nikos Christidis, a Met Office climate attribution scientist, said: “We calculated that by the end of the century, under a medium [future] emissions scenario, a UK average temperature of 10C could occur almost every year.”
Guardian analysis in August revealed how people across the world were losing their lives and livelihoods because of more deadly and more frequent heatwaves, floods, wildfires and droughts brought by the climate crisis.


Dr Mark McCarthy, at the Met Office, said: “The UK surpassing an annual average temperature of 10C is a notable moment in our climatological history [and] comes as no surprise. Since 1884, all 10 years recording the highest annual temperature have occurred from 2003. It is clear from the observational record that human-induced global warming is already impacting the UK’s climate.” Nine of the 10 coldest years on record occurred more than a century ago, the Met Office data showed.
“Even with the influence of climate change we don’t expect every year to be the hottest on record from now on,” McCarthy said. “Natural variability of the UK climate means there will always be some variation year to year. However, looking at longer term trends it is easy to pick out the influence climate change is having over time.”
Prof Richard Allan, at the University of Reading, said: “Higher temperatures in the UK are contributing to more severe heatwaves, droughts and wildfires but also more intense rainfall events and flooding. These impacts will become progressively worse until global temperatures are stabilised by cutting global carbon emissions to net zero.”


https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/jan/05/uk-average-annual-temperature-tops-10c-for-first-time?CMP=share_btn_url




The guardian ukn 3
Environmental review of 2022: another mile on the ‘highway to climate hell’
This article is more than 2 years old
Deadly floods in Pakistan and record heat in the UK were just two symptoms this year of the global crisis
 Damian Carrington 

Damian Carrington Environment editor
Fri 30 Dec 2022 12.09 GMT
Share
Two events in 2022 symbolised the climate breakdown that humanity is careering towards and the real, though fast-fading, hope that the world can still be steered away from calamity.
The first was the apocalyptic floods that submerged a third of Pakistan, the world’s fifth most populous country, affecting 33 million people. Scientists found that the climate crisis had made the deluge up to 50% more intense.
The second was the re-election of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva as the president of Brazil. Experts had said the fate of the Amazon rested on the vote. Another term of the rampant destruction seen under Jair Bolsonaro could have pushed the world’s biggest rainforest past its tipping point, with global consequences.
Overall, however, the climate crisis is bleaker than it has ever been. In October, a slew of reports laid bare how close the planet had neared to irreversible climate breakdown, with one UN study stating there was “no credible pathway in place to 1.5C”, the internationally agreed limit for global heating, and that progress on cutting carbon emissions was “woefully inadequate”.


Scientists had revealed in September that five “disastrous” tipping points may already have been passed due to the 1.1C of global heating to date. These included the collapse of Greenland’s ice cap, eventually producing a huge sea level rise and the collapse of a key current in the north Atlantic, disrupting rain upon which billions of people depend for food.
The climate equation remains simple: carbon emissions must halve by 2030 to have an even chance of keeping to the 1.5C limit. But in 2022 emissions will have risen to a record level. “We are on a highway to climate hell with our foot on the accelerator,” said the UN secretary general, António Guterres.
It is clear that no new fossil fuel projects are consistent with climate goals. But in May the Guardian revealed that the world’s biggest firms are planning scores of “carbon bomb” oil and gas projects, in effect placing multibillion-dollar bets against humanity halting global heating. Many of the carbon bombs are in the fracking fields of the US, the world’s largest oil producer.
With high energy prices due to Russia’s war in Ukraine, 2022 has been a bonanza year for fossil fuel companies, but it was also revealed that the oil and gas industry has delivered $1tn a year in pure profit for the past 50 years.
The energy crisis also meant global coal burning will hit an all-time high in 2022, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). But responsibility for emissions is highly unequal, data showed, even in wealthy nations: in the UK, a year of emissions from richest people is the same as the lowest earners produce in a quarter of a century.
Deep impact
The effects of the climate crisis were clearer than ever in 2022. The Pakistan floods were preceded by a searing heatwave that also hit India and was made 30 times more likely by global heating.
Dangerous heatwaves also engulfed parts of China, Europe, and the US, with scientists saying a northern hemisphere summer as hot as 2022 would have been “virtually impossible” without global heating, and led to a record drought. In the UK, temperatures rose above 40C for the first time, obliterating records and shocking scientists.


A man walks trough corn crops amid a severe drought, near Jiujiang, China, in August. Photograph: Alex Plavevski/EPA
In the US, Hurricane Ian became the most deadly hurricane since Katrina in 2005, while the American west continued to struggle with the most extreme megadrought in at least 1,200 years. In Australia, hot seas led to the Great Barrier Reef suffering its fourth mass bleaching in just seven years. Flooding also struck around the world, including Nigeria, Australia, Thailand and Vietnam, and Venezuela.
In August, a Guardian analysis revealed how people across the world are losing their lives and livelihoods to heatwaves, floods, wildfires and droughts, all made more deadly and more frequent by the climate crisis. Sherry Rehman, Pakistan’s climate minister, said in September: “This dystopia is on our doorstep; it’s going to be next in their country [in the global north]. If you’re not understanding that it’s right here, right now, then you’re really sleepwalking into annihilation.”
A Guardian investigation also revealed how a lack of crop diversity means that the climate crisis was already threatening many of our favourite foods, including rice, chickpeas, coffee and vanilla.
‘Turbocharged’ renewables growth
The Cop27 UN climate summit in Egypt in November was the key event intended to ramp up global action, but two weeks of increasingly fractious and messy talks ended “disappointment” for those hoping for progress on the global goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C. The target came under attack from countries including Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, Russia, Brazil and China.
However, there were at least signs of a much-needed pact between the developed and developing world in an agreement to set up a fund for loss and damage. Its purpose is to help rebuild countries and communities laid waste by the unavoidable ravages of climate breakdown. Rich countries will be expected to pay into the fund and it will pay out to the poorest countries which are suffering most. Deals to phase out coal use in South Africa, Indonesia and Vietnam were also a plus in 2022.
In the US, President Joe Biden passed the biggest climate bill in the country’s history, channelling $369bn in support to renewable energy, electric cars and heating, and energy efficiency. The US is the world’s second biggest polluter and the bill could lead to emissions being slashed by 40% by 2030, compared with 2005.


A bush fire seen from Port Noarlunga, South Australia. Photograph: Matthew Orr/Getty Images
In Australia, after nearly a decade of destruction and delay under conservative administrations, a new Labor government quickly increased the nation’s climate target from a 26% reduction in emissions by 2030 to 43%. It also passed the country’s first climate change legislation since 2011. The new climate change minister, Chris Bowen, was nonetheless cautious, saying: “Today doesn’t mark the end of the work; today the work just gets started.”
Russia’s war in Ukraine pushed up energy prices. But it also sparked an efficiency drive in Europe and “turbocharged” renewable energy growth, according to the IEA. However, political turmoil in the UK delayed action on efficiency and its government also approved its first new coal mine for 30 years and opposed solar farms, undermining its international reputation on climate.
New forms of climate protest sprang up in the UK and rapidly spread to other countries. The most high-profile action by the Just Stop Oil group saw tomato soup thrown onto the glass covering Van Gogh’s famous Sunflowers painting. Another group, called Tyre Extinguishers, claimed to have “disarmed” – deflated the tyres – on more than 600 SUVs in one night, across nine countries.
Deal for nature
Humanity’s destruction of wildlife and nature is seen by scientists as just as serious as the climate crisis, with some arguing a sixth mass extinction is under way that will undermine the clean air, water and food that civilisation depends upon. Data released in 2022 indicates the destruction continues apace, with the average size of animal populations now having plunged by 70% since 1970.
But while more than 100 world leaders attended Cop27, the equivalent event for biodiversity – Cop15 – attracted none. That was despite Cop15 being charged with the greater task, sealing a deal on the action for the decade ahead.
In the event, the deal struck by the world’s nations in Montreal was largely seen as historic. It included targets to protect 30% of land and oceans for nature by 2030, reform $500bn of environmentally damaging subsidies, tackle species extinctions, increase funding and, crucially, to promote and protect rights of Indigenous peoples.
The test will be whether these targets are met – the ones set a decade ago were all missed.
Chemical cocktails
Pollution is the third major environmental crisis and January saw scientists reach a striking conclusion – the cocktail of chemicals pervading the planet now threatens the stability of global ecosystems upon which humanity depends. The release of 350,000 synthetic chemicals including plastics, pesticides, industrial compounds and antibiotics, meant chemical pollution has crossed a “planetary boundary”, they said.
Toxic air, water and soil are already killing 9 million people a year, another report found, making it responsible for one in six of all deaths. Pollution “is an existential threat to human health and planetary health, and jeopardises the sustainability of modern societies”, the review concluded.


A woman wears a scarf over her face as she walks past factories in Skopje, North Macedonia. Photograph: Georgi Licovski/EPA-EFE
More of the impacts of pollution on people were revealed in 2022, with environmental toxins being linked to the worsening obesity pandemic and to falling sperm quality.
The presence of air pollution particles in the lungs, livers and brains of unborn babies, long before they have taken their first breath, was revealed in October. Researchers said the discovery was “very worrying”, as the gestation period of foetuses is the most vulnerable stage of human development. Separate research estimated that almost a million stillbirths a year can be attributed to air pollution.
Microplastics, another planet-pervading pollutant, was found in human blood for the first time in 2022, showing the particles can travel around the body and may lodge in organs. In March, world leaders from 173 countries agreed to develop a legally binding treaty on plastic waste over the next two years.
The problem of sewage pollution was particularly high profile in England, with water companies revealed to have discharged raw sewage into rivers 372,533 times in a year. One company was also found to have dumped sewage onto bathing beaches 493 times in just eight days in November. A Guardian investigation revealed how the privatised water companies suck billions of pounds a year out of England’s water system in dividends and debt payments, a situation described by one expert as “a scandal of financial engineering”.
Attention grabbers
Among the stories that really caught the attention of readers in 2022 was a spectacular collection of images, headlined: ‘It was like an apocalyptic movie’: 20 climate photographs that changed the world. The stunning images included dust storms in Australia, wildfires in Greece and huskies pulling a sled through water in Greenland.
Another spectacular story was the discovery of what may be the world’s longest animal – a 45-metre-long deep-sea siphonophore, arranged in a feeding spiral and trailing its deadly tentacles.
Calling out bad behaviour was popular with readers, from the short private jet flights of Kylie Jenner and other celebrities to the “word salad of nonsense” spouted by Jordan Peterson about climate models.
Homely subjects were also popular, including advice to UK gardeners to refrain from mowing their lawns until May in order to let wild plants and insects thrive and the news that a bird flu outbreak meant that free-range eggs were no longer available after hens were moved indoors.


Indigenous people demand justice for Dom Phillips and Bruno Pereira, at the supreme court in Brasilia. Photograph: Evaristo Sa/AFP/Getty Images
Final farewells
Finally, 2022 saw the deaths of the Guardian writer Dom Phillips and Indigenous activist Bruno Pereira, murdered in the Brazilian Amazon. They were killed in “an undeclared global war against nature and the people who defend it,” wrote Jonathan Watts, a Guardian staffer and Phillips’s friend.
The British scientist James Lovelock also died in 2022, at the age of 103. He was best known for his Gaia hypothesis, the idea that life on Earth is a self-regulating community of organisms interacting with each other and their surroundings.
Lovelock worked well into his 90s, saying in 2011: “My main reason for not relaxing into contented retirement is that, like most of you, I am deeply concerned about the probability of massively harmful climate change and the need to do something about it now.”
 This article was amended on 1 January 2023 because an earlier version said “the oil and gas industry has delivered $1tn a day in pure profit for the past 50 years”. The figure is $1tn a year.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/dec/30/environmental-review-of-2022-another-mile-on-the-highway-to-climate-hell?CMP=share_btn_url




the guardian uk 4


The climate crisis in charts: how 2024 has set unwanted new records
Data tracks how Earth’s heating has led to rising sea levels and extreme weather – yet there is no sign of emissions slowing
Helena Horton, Lucy Swan, Ana Lucía González Paz and Harvey Symons
Wed 20 Nov 2024 05.00 GMT
Earth’s surface temperature is heating up
“The era of global boiling has arrived” is what the UN chief, António Guterres, presciently declared last year. In 2024, he has continued to be proven right; a report by the EU’s space programme has found it is “virtually certain” that 2024 will be the hottest year on record. The scientists found global temperatures for the past 12 months were 1.62C greater than the 1850-1900 average, when humanity started to burn vast volumes of coal, oil and gas. The chart below shows just how quickly global surface temperatures have climbed, and this year is on track to be the first to hit 1.5C above preindustrial temperatures.
… which we experienced as extreme heat
And for some, it felt even hotter. Southern Europe is facing more and more heat stress days, defined as days that feel hotter than 32C, as the chart below shows. This data is from a report by Copernicus, which found that large parts of the area had two full months with “strong heat stress”, reaching 60 days in total over the season. A few areas in Greece and western Turkey experienced “strong heat stress” on every day of the summer, and about two months of “very strong heat stress”. Though some have the luxury of air conditioning to escape the rocketing temperatures, our reporting this year found groups including migrant workers and prisoners faced stifling, dangerous heat with no respite.
The oceans are heating, too
Last year’s marine heatwaves shocked scientists, as waters warmed to previously unthinkable levels. And it appears this was not an anomaly: in the first half of 2024, ocean surface heat levels soared above the heights they reached the previous year.
… which we experienced as extreme rainfall
Warmer waters have a higher rate of evaporation, which supercharges rain clouds and intensifies rainfall. It makes the devastating hurricanes such as those seen in the US this year far more likely. The chart below, based on Lancet data, shows that 61% of all global land during the period of 1994-2023 had an increase in extreme rainfall compared with the period between 1961 and 1990.
… and drought
While some parts of the world faced extremely heavy rain, others that rely on thriving rivers had their waterways dry up. The Amazon in particular suffered this year, with drought putting inhabitants at risk. The chart below shows almost half of global land area was affected by drought for at least one month this year, and it also displays how drought is increasing as the planet heats.
We continue to emit planet-heating greenhouse gases
We’ve known about the problems coming our way for decades, yet humanity continues to burn fossil fuels, causing gases such as carbon dioxide and methane to build up in the atmosphere and boil the planet. This chart shows how the amount of carbon in the atmosphere is building; the concentration of CO2 reached 420 parts per million (ppm) in 2023, which is 51% greater than before the industrial revolution. Methane concentrations hit 1,934 parts per billion (ppb), a rise of 165% from preindustrial levels, and nitrous oxide hit 336.9 ppb, a rise of 25%.
There is no sign of us stopping
Despite countries having signed up to the Paris Agreement – pledging to reach “net zero” in coming decades, which would mean not emitting more carbon than is absorbed into the land and sea – there is no sign of this happening. This year is on track to set another new record for global carbon emissions. Data indicates planet-heating emissions from coal, oil and gas will rise by 0.8% in 2024. Emissions have to fall by 43% by 2030 for the world to have any chance of keeping to the 1.5C temperature rise target.
Sea levels are rising as ice shrinks
The heating planet is causing ice to melt, and in turn this water goes into the sea, causing levels to rise. Not only that, but it causes a vicious circle. As heating melts the sea ice, it reveals darker water that absorbs more of the sun’s heat, causing more heating. Scientists think the changes in the Arctic may be responsible for worsened heatwaves and floods in Eurasia and North America. Sea levels are inexorably rising as ice on land melts and hotter oceans expand. Sea levels are slow to respond to global heating, so even if the temperature rise is restricted to 2C above preindustrial levels, one in five people in the world will eventually experience their cities being submerged, from New York to London to Shanghai.
But we are building more renewables
A glimmer of hope is that the green economy is finally taking off, with record renewables being built around the world. The Renewable Capacity Statistics 2024 report released by the International Renewable Energy Agency (Irena) shows that 2023 set a new record in renewables deployment in the power sector by reaching a total capacity of 3,870GW globally. Countries such as China are driving this trend, producing dizzying amounts of renewable energy, but developing nations are lagging behind despite massive economic and development needs. While China’s capacity increased by 63%,and Asia’s as a whole by 69%, Africa’s increased by only 4.6%.… and driving more electric cars. These charts show how electric cars are taking off across the globe, though their popularity is not evenly distributed. In 2023, just under 60% of new electric car registrations were in China, just under 25% in Europe, and 10% in the US – together making up nearly 95% of global electric car sales combined.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2024/nov/20/the-climate-crisis-in-charts-how-2024-has-set-unwanted-new-records?CMP=share_btn_url


Independant 1
Year of deadly weather: Climate change added 41 extra heat days and supercharged disasters
The world suffered an extra 41 days of dangerous heat in 2024 which fueled catastrophic disasters that scientists say would have been virtually impossible without the climate crisis.
Scientists also say that 26 of the 29 most severe disasters this year were intensified by the climate crisis driven by the use of fossil fuels.
The disasters, which included hurricanes, floods, wildfires and droughts, mark a dangerous “new normal” driven by rising global temperatures, according to a new report published by World Weather Attribution, or WWA, and Climate Central late last week.
“The impacts of fossil fuel warming have never been clearer or more devastating than in 2024,” Dr Friederike Otto, co-founder of WWA and senior lecturer in climate science at Imperial College London, said.
“Extreme weather killed thousands of people, forced millions from their homes, and caused unrelenting suffering. We know exactly what we need to do to stop things from getting worse: stop burning fossil fuels.”
This year saw the world experience recordbreaking heat, with the hottest day in history recorded on 22 July. The additional 41 days of dangerous heat – defined as temperatures in the top 10 per cent of the 1991-2020 baseline – exposed many millions of people to conditions that threaten human health, particularly in vulnerable regions.
The volunteer team of international scientists that prepared the new report compared daily temperatures around the world in 2024 to temperatures that would have been expected without the climate crisis.
They found that some regions saw as many as 150 days or more of extreme heat due to the climate crisis.
“Heat waves are by far the deadliest extreme event,” Dr Otto said.
She added that “if we cannot communicate convincingly” that a lot of people are dying “it’s much harder to raise this awareness”.
This year is set to be the hottest on record, beating 2023, and may mark the first time the global average temperature exceeded 1.5C above pre-industrial levels.
Reaching this milestone serves as a dangerous warning that the world is on track to breach the safe limit agreed upon in the Paris Agreement.
Not just heatwaves, the world suffered a number of catastrophic disasters this year. In Africa, floods in Sudan, Nigeria, Cameroon, Niger, and Chad killed at least 2,000 people and displaced millions.
The report warns that if global warming reaches 2C – a scenario that could unfold as early as the 2040s – similar extreme rainfall could become an annual event, devastating communities and infrastructure.


The Amazon, referred to as the “lungs of the planet”, experienced one of its most severe droughts on record, driven by climate change, which made it 30 times more likely. The drought pushed the Amazon closer to an irreversible tipping point where the forest could shift to a drier state, leading to a massive tree dieback and the release of vast amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Further south, Brazil’s Pantanal wetlands, one of the world’s richest ecosystems, endured a historic wildfire season fueled by the climate crisis. Scientists found that the hot, dry, and windy conditions that enabled the fires were 40 per cent more severe due to global warming.
In the US, Hurricane Helene tore through six states, killing 230 people and becoming one of the deadliest storms to strike mainland America in decades.
The report says climate change made the high sea temperatures that fueled Helene 200-500 times more likely and increased its rainfall by 10 per cent. Just weeks later, Hurricane Milton hit the southeast, with rapid analysis showing it too was intensified by warming oceans.
“These storms are becoming stronger and more destructive because of climate change,” said Daniel Gilford, a climate scientist at Climate Central. “Human-caused ocean warming is boosting hurricane wind speeds, allowing them to reach a full category higher, on average.”


The new report paints a grim picture of the future, warning that if fossil fuel emissions are not urgently curtailed, the number of dangerously hot days will continue to grow by the year as will the intensity and frequency of extreme weather events.
“Almost everywhere on Earth, daily temperatures hot enough to threaten human health have become more common because of climate change,” said Joseph Giguere, a research associate at Climate Central. “Residents in many countries are now exposed to additional weeks of dangerous heat that would have been virtually impossible without global warming.”
The report also cautions that the impacts of the climate crisis are increasingly overshadowing natural weather patterns, such as El Niño, which traditionally play a key role in driving extreme events. While El Niño contributed to some of the extreme weather seen in 2024, the report argues the climate crisis was the dominant factor in most cases including the Amazon drought and the historic floods in Africa.
“This annual report reads like a failed scorecard,” said Ben Clarke, a researcher at the Centre for Environmental Policy at Imperial College. “The world isn’t cutting emissions or preparing for climate change quickly enough. The consequences are recordbreaking extreme weather events that cause deaths, displacement, and loss of livelihoods.”


oScientists urge governments to prioritise a rapid transition to renewable energy and scale up efforts to adapt to worsening climate impacts.
“Another devastating year of extreme weather has shown that we are not well prepared for life at 1.3-1.5C of warming,” Julie Arrighi, director of programmes at the Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, said.
https://www.independent.co.uk/climate-change/news/2024-climate-change-heatwaves-hurricanes-storms-b2670536.html




Independant 2
Cities ablaze and countries submerged: The worst climate disasters of 2022
The Independent looks back at some of the year’s most erratic and devastating events
Louise Boyle
Senior Climate Correspondent, New York
Tuesday 10 January 2023 12:22 GMT
The climate crisis intensified Pakistan’s monsoon rains by 50-75 per cent, World Weather Attribution (WWA) subsequently discovered. WWA, an international team of climate scientists who volunteer their expertise, frequently respond to this pressing question: To what extent was an extreme event influenced by climate change?
Hurricane Ian strikes Florida
Hurricane Ian slammed into Florida at near Category-5 status in September after undergoing “rapid intensification”. The phenomenon - which sees tropical cyclones super-charged over a short period of time - is becoming more common as the climate crisis makes oceans hotter.
Ian made landfall in the state’s southwest with winds that sheared off roofs and coastal surge as high as a two-storey building in places.
“We’ve never seen storm surge of this magnitude,” Florida Governor Ron DeSantis said, describing the storm as “basically a 500-year flooding event”.
The damage was near total in some communities with homes swept clean from foundations and others left up to their roofs in water. Large boats and yachts were tossed together like bath toys and left in heaps miles inland.
Sanibel Island, an idyllic ocean community outside of Fort Myers, found itself cleaved from the mainland after a large portion of its only access road, the Sanibel Causeway, collapsed.
More than 100 people died in Hurricane Ian with many drowning in their homes or vehicles after they refused to evacuate. It was the third-deadliest storm to hit the US mainland after Katrina and Sandy.
Thousands of people have been long-term displaced after losing their homes. Ian caused between $50-65bn in insured damages, according to the global insurer Swiss Re.
Extreme storms, amplified by climate change, occurred around the world this year. Puerto Rico is still recovering from Hurricane Fiona in September which brought “historic” rains and severe winds, leaving the entire island in blackout. The same month, two million people in southwestern Japan were evacuated due to Typhoon Nanmadol which brought rainfall and wind gusts of up to 155mph (250 km/h).
Heatwave in China
The summer brought sustained, extreme heat for nearly three months to large parts of China with dizzying temperatures and the first national drought alert.
It was the country’s strongest heat wave since record-keeping began in 1961, said Chinese forecasters. Temperatures topped 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) in cities and rural villages across southern China.
Residents in Sichuan province were told by officials to keep air conditioners above 26C while railways stations and other public places dimmed their lights. Shanghai’s Bund district switched off its iconic light display to conserve power.
The mighty Yangtze River was reduced to a trickle in places which led to rolling blackouts, disruptions of cargo traffic, and industry slowdowns as hydropower stations were impacted by low water levels.
The Jialing River, a tributary of the Yangtze, was so depleted that local residents took evening walks along the dusty riverbed.
Chongqing, in China’s southwest, was hit particularly hard with fires erupting in mountain forests and 1,500 people forced to evacuate. Some shopping malls limited their opening hours to save power, and residents tried to cool off in Second World War air-raid shelters.
Heatwaves are now starting earlier and lasting longer than usual. China’s extreme heat was believed to be linked to the human-driven climate crisis but scientists continue to investigate.
Wildfires and deadly heat in Europe
Record-breaking, killer temperatures swept across Europe this summer and led to wildfires in places that have never seen them before.
Over 20,000 people are believed to have died in western Europe due to the extreme heatwave.
“Greenhouse gas emissions, from burning fossil fuels like coal, gas and oil, are making heatwaves hotter, longer-lasting and more frequent. Heatwaves that used to be rare are now common; heatwaves that used to be impossible are now happening and killing people,” said Dr Friederike Otto, Senior Lecturer in Climate Science at the Grantham Institute at Imperial College London and co-lead of the World Weather Attribution group.
In the UK, the temperature climbed above 40C (104F) for the first time in recorded history, reaching 40.3C in the small town of Coningsby on 19th July. WWA found the UK heatwave was at least 10 times more likely to happen because of human-caused climate change.
The heat compounded a critical drought in much of Europe and primed landscapes for wildfire. Portugal saw huge blazes in the Serra da Estrela National Park, a protected UNESCO World Heritage Site which at least is sparsely populated.
In central Germany, hundreds of emergency personnel fought a major forest fire central in the Harz National Park.
In France, huge blazes ravaged swathes of countryside. Hundreds of firefighters traveled from neighbouring European countries to help French crews get the fires under control in the Gironde region. The EU’s Copernicus satellite programme revealed that the estimated carbon emissions from wildfires in France during June, July and August were the highest since 2003, reflecting the severity of this year’s fire season.
https://www.independent.co.uk/climate-change/news/worst-climate-disasters-2022-hurricane-wildfires-heatwave-b2255198.html


The independant 3




World’s 1.5C goal slipping beyond reach without urgent action, warns landmark IPCC climate report
‘It is clear that the next decade is going to be pivotal to securing the future of our planet,’ says UK prime minister Boris Johnson
The target for limiting global heating set out in the Paris Agreement is slipping beyond reach, the world’s leading authority on climate science warns, with the crisis already affecting every region of the planet.
Some of the impacts, such as global sea level rise, could be “irreversible for centuries to millennia”, according to the most comprehensive assessment yet from the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
The group of 234 scientists from 66 countries found “it is more likely than not” that the world will reach 1.5C above pre-industrial levels sometime over the next 20 years – with the risk of far greater global warming if little is done to tackle rapidly rising greenhouse gas emissions. Temperatures currently stand at around 1.2C above pre-industrial levels.
IPCC report - live: Latest reactions as UN report warns time running out to save planet
And there is “unequivocal” evidence that humans are to blame for rapidly rising land and ocean temperatures – the strongest statement yet from the IPCC after its last assessment report in 2013 said people were the “dominant cause” of global heating.
“We’re already experiencing climate change, including more frequent and more extreme weather events,” Prof Ed Hawkins, a climate researcher at the University of Reading, one of the scientists behind the milestone report, told a press briefing.
“The consequences will continue to get worse for every bit of warning and – for many of these consequences – there’s no turning back.”
To find out what others are saying and join the conversation scroll down for the comments section or click here for our most commented on articles 
The summary findings, from the first chapter of the IPCC’s sixth assessment report, come just three months before world leaders are due to meet in Glasgow for the global climate summit, Cop26. The “summary for policymakers”, a 41-page overview of the report released on Monday morning, will play an important role in informing high-level discussions on how to cut emissions.
UK prime minister Boris Johnson said the report’s findings made “sobering reading”.
“It is clear that the next decade is going to be pivotal to securing the future of our planet,” he said in a statement. “We know what must be done to limit global warming – consign coal to history and shift to clean energy sources, protect nature and provide climate finance for countries on the frontline.”
“The IPCC report underscores the overwhelming urgency of this moment. The world must come together before the ability to limit global warming to 1.5C is out of reach,” said the US special presidential envoy for climate John Kerry.
He added: “We can get to the low carbon economy we urgently need, but time is not on our side. This is the critical decade for action, and Cop26 in Glasgow must be a turning point in this crisis.”
UN chief Antonio Guterres said the findings represent “a code red for humanity”.
“If we combine forces now, we can avert climate catastrophe. But, as today’s report makes clear, there is no time for delay and no room for excuses. I count on government leaders and all stakeholders to ensure Cop26 is a success,” he said.
0 seconds of 0 secondsVolume 0%
 
The report reflects major progress in the field of attribution – the science of how human-caused climate change is influencing the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. Hundreds have died in recent heatwaves from the US and Canada to India, along with Iraq and elsewhere in the Middle East.
Sign up to The Independent’s free weekly climate newsletter by clicking here
Flooding has devastated regions of Nigeria, India, China, Germany, Belgium and the UK, while wildfires have exploded across the Brazilian Amazon, Siberia, parts of southern Europe and the American west.
The report says “it is virtually certain” that heatwaves have become more intense and more frequent over the past 70 years and that many other types of extreme weather events are also becoming more likely.
“Climate change is not a problem of the future – it’s here and now and affecting every region of the world,” said Dr Friederike Otto, a report author and associate director of the Environmental Change Institute at the University of Oxford.


Almost all countries agreed to keep global temperatures below 2C by 2100, with an aspiration of limiting warming to 1.5C under the historic Paris Agreement in 2015. An interim IPCC report in 2018 found that the additional half a degree of heating would spell disaster for low-lying island nations, tropical coral reefs and glaciers.
The new report looks at five possible futures for the Earth’s climate over the coming decades, ranging from a scenario with very low greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to one with very high GHG emissions.
It finds that, under every scenario, “it is more likely than not” that the world will reach 1.5C sometime between 2021 and 2040. And, under a scenario of very high GHG emissions, it is “very likely” that temperatures will exceed 1.5C in the near term.
However, if the world successfully cuts GHG emissions to very low levels and rolls out techniques to remove CO2 from the atmosphere, it is more likely than not that temperatures will decline back to below 1.5C towards the end of the century, the report adds.
“[If we] go past 1.5 degrees, that doesn’t necessarily constitute a failure of our climate policies,” said Prof Piers Forster, a report author and director of the Priestley International Centre for Climate at the University of Leeds.
“We want to clearly get across that every bit of additional warming we can prevent is really a success.”
The IPCC’s 2018 interim report found that the world will reach 1.5C at a later period of between 2030 and 2052. However, the report authors said the two estimates are based on different methodologies and so are not directly comparable.
Analysis by the research group Climate Action Tracker shows that current pledges and targets put forward by countries would cause around 2.4C of global heating by 2100. Most countries do not have the policies in place to meet these targets.
This report should galvanize every country, company, city and citizen to fight like hell to avoid every bit of warming we can
Helen Mountford, World Resources Institute
The report also warns that potential tipping points in Earth’s climate – thresholds where a small change could lead to dramatic change – “can’t be ruled out”. Such tipping points could include ice-sheet collapse or abrupt changes to ocean circulation patterns, it adds.
However, taking urgent action to address greenhouse gas emissions would minimise the likelihood of such tipping points occurring, the scientists said.
The report adds that oceans and forests, which have long acted as buffers to the climate crisis by absorbing CO2 from the atmosphere, are projected to be less effective if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise rapidly.
Along with the goal of net-zero CO2 emissions by 2050, the report highlights that dramatic and rapid cuts in super-potent methane would have a significant impact, not just on global heating but more immediately on air quality.
Methane has a shorter lifespan that CO2, which remains in the atmosphere for centuries, but has about 80 times the warming power over the first 20 years.
A UN report published in May found that if methane is cut in half by the end of this decade, around half a degree of warming could be prevented by 2050.
This is highly achievable and relatively cheap, researchers found, as it requires plugging leaky oil and gas pipelines, sealing abandoned wells and capturing gas from landfill along with the more complex issues of reducing methane burps from livestock and in the agricultural sector.
Climate activists, policy experts and environmental groups called for immediate action in light of the report’s findings.
Mohamed Adow, director of Nairobi-based think tank Power Shift Africa, said: “Those of us living in Africa have been aware of the urgency of the climate crisis for many years. Lives and livelihoods have been shattered by overwhelming heat, rising seas and extreme weather. It is vital that governments heed the warning of the IPCC’s scientists and act with speed and boldness to make our world safer, cleaner and greener.”
Helen Mountford, vice president of climate and economics at the World Resources Institute, said: “If this IPCC report doesn’t shock you into action, it should. The report paints a very sobering picture of the unforgiving, unimaginable world we have in store if our addiction to burning fossil fuels and destroying forests continues.
https://www.independent.co.uk/climate-change/news/ipcc-report-2021-climate-un-b1899193.html


The independent 4
2023 confirmed as hottest year ever as climate records ‘tumbling like dominoes’
S
The findings are hardly surprising, but a global gut-punch nonetheless: 2023 has been confirmed as the hottest year on record “by a large margin”.
For the first time, every day of the year was 1C hotter at a global level than the pre-industrial era, the EU’s climate change service Copernicus said.
Nearly half the days in 2023 breached 1.5C (2.7F) – the temperature goal set by the global Paris Agreement to stave off the most harmful consequences of the climate crisis. This was the case for just over 20 per cent of days in 2016, the previous hottest year.
In November, another barrier was broken. Two days that month measured more than 2C above pre-industrial levels for the first time – surpassing the upper warming limit of the Paris deal.
The findings do not mean that the Paris Agreement has failed, as the deal is based on temperature changes over 20-year periods. But it sets a “dire precedent,” Copernicus warned.
The record-breaking nature of 2023 was both “inevitable” – as a result of continued climate warming and El Nino, a recurring natural phenomenon that influences temperature and weather patterns, Copernicus said. El Nino emerged in spring 2023, and played a role, but it “does not explain all of the increase in ocean surface temperatures at a global scale”.
The year also experienced “additional unforeseen factors – some of which are still under scientific investigation”.
It has now been suggested that 2024 could be even hotter than 2023, with forecasts showing that this year could end with an average temperature more than 1.5C above the pre-industrial baseline.
 
The analysis found:
* The global average temperature in 2023 was 14.98C – 0.17C higher than 2016, making it warmer “by a large margin”
* July and August 2023 were the warmest two months on record
* Global ocean temperatures were “persistently and unusually high” from April to December, leading to historic marine heatwaves around the world including in parts of the Mediterranean, the Gulf of Mexico, the Indian Ocean, and the North Atlantic
* It was a “remarkable” year for Antarctic sea ice – reaching record lows in eight months
The Copernicus report summarised 2023’s worst climate extremes and what’s driving them – primarily the continued rise of greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels.
Concentrations of carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere reached record levels in 2023, researchers found.
The hottest year on record led to a cascade of extreme events across the planet. Emissions from wildfires in 2023 increased by 30 per cent from 2022, in large part a result of the hundreds of blazes that raged across Canada. Wildfires also severely affected southern Europe, South America, Australia and Hawaii.
Other regions suffered extreme drought, including Mexico, Argentina, the Amazon basin and west Africa. Heatwaves descended over southern Europe, north Africa, and parts of North America and Asia.
Autumn brought a steady march of powerful storms, accompanied by heavy flooding. The impact of Storm Daniel devastated the city of Derna, Libya, in September, while storms Babet and Ciaran caused severe problems in October in northern and western Europe.
At least 12,000 people were killed by floods, wildfires, cyclones, storms, and landslides globally in 2023, according to analysis from Save the Children, around a third more than in 2022.
https://www.independent.co.uk/climate-change/news/hottest-year-record-2023-b2475209.html


Bbc news 1
Climate change: IPCC report is 'code red for humanity'
9 August 2021


Human activity is changing the climate in unprecedented and sometimes irreversible ways, a major UN scientific report has said.
The landmark study warns of increasingly extreme heatwaves, droughts and flooding, and a key temperature limit being broken in just over a decade.
The report "is a code red for humanity", says the UN chief.
But scientists say a catastrophe can be avoided if the world acts fast.
There is hope that deep cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases could stabilise rising temperatures.
Advertisement
Echoing the scientists' findings, UN Secretary General António Guterres said: "If we combine forces now, we can avert climate catastrophe. But, as today's report makes clear, there is no time for delay and no room for excuses. I count on government leaders and all stakeholders to ensure COP26 is a success."
The sober assessment of our planet's future has been delivered by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a group of scientists whose findings are endorsed by the world's governments.
Their report is the first major review of the science of climate change since 2013. Its release comes less than three months before a key climate summit in Glasgow known as COP26.
* Mass evacuations as wildfires spread across Greece
* Time nearly up to stop climate catastrophe - Sharma
* Research shows millions more at risk of flooding
* A really simple guide to climate change
In strong, confident tones, the IPCC's document says "it is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land".


According to Prof Ed Hawkins, from the University of Reading, UK, and one of the report's authors, the scientists cannot be any clearer on this point.
"It is a statement of fact, we cannot be any more certain; it is unequivocal and indisputable that humans are warming the planet."
Petteri Taalas, Secretary-General of the World Meteorological Organization, said: "By using sports terms, one could say the atmosphere has been exposed to doping, which means we have begun observing extremes more often than before."
The authors say that since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years.
Advertisement
This warming is "already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe".
Whether it's heatwaves like the ones recently experienced in Greece and western North America, or floods like those in Germany and China, "their attribution to human influence has strengthened" over the past decade.


IPCC report key points
* Global surface temperature was 1.09C higher in the decade between 2011-2020 than between 1850-1900.
* The past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850
* The recent rate of sea level rise has nearly tripled compared with 1901-1971
* Human influence is "very likely" (90%) the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers since the 1990s and the decrease in Arctic sea-ice
* It is "virtually certain" that hot extremes including heatwaves have become more frequent and more intense since the 1950s, while cold events have become less frequent and less severe


The new report also makes clear that the warming we've experienced to date has made changes to many of our planetary support systems that are irreversible on timescales of centuries to millennia.
The oceans will continue to warm and become more acidic. Mountain and polar glaciers will continue melting for decades or centuries.
"The consequences will continue to get worse for every bit of warming," said Prof Hawkins.
"And for many of these consequences, there's no going back."


When it comes to sea level rise, the scientists have modelled a likely range for different levels of emissions.
However, a rise of around 2m by the end of this century cannot be ruled out - and neither can a 5m rise by 2150.
Such outcomes, while unlikely, would threaten many millions more people in coastal areas with flooding by 2100.
One key aspect of the report is the expected rate of temperature rise and what it means for the safety of humanity.


AAlmost every nation on Earth signed up to the goals of the Paris climate agreement in 2015.
This pact aims to keep the rise in global temperatures well below 2C this century and to pursue efforts to keep it under 1.5C.
This new report says that under all the emissions scenarios considered by the scientists, both targets will be broken this century unless huge cuts in carbon take place.
Can temperature rise be kept below 1.5°C?
* 1.1°CThe increase in temperature since pre-industrial times
* 2,400bn tonnesCO2 humans have emitted to date
* 500bn tonnesmore would leave only a 50-50 chance of staying under 1.5°C
* 40bn tonnesRoughly amount of CO2 humanity emits every year
Source: IPCC
The authors believe that 1.5C will be reached by 2040 in all scenarios. If emissions aren't slashed in the next few years, this will happen even earlier.


This was predicted in the IPCC's special report on 1.5C in 2018 and this new study now confirms it.
"We will hit one-and-a-half degrees in individual years much earlier. We already hit it in two months during the El Niño in 2016," said Prof Malte Meinshausen, an IPCC author from the University of Melbourne in Australia.
"The new report's best estimate is the middle of 2034, but the uncertainty is huge and ranges between now and never."


The consequences of going past 1.5C over a period of years would be unwelcome in a world that has already experienced a rapid uptick in extreme events with a temperature rise since pre-industrial times of 1.1C.
"We will see even more intense and more frequent heatwaves," said Dr Friederike Otto, from the University of Oxford, UK, and one of the IPCC report's authors.
"And we will also see an increase in heavy rainfall events on a global scale, and also increases in some types of droughts in some regions of the world."


Prof Carolina Vera, vice-chair of the working group that produced the document, said: "The report clearly shows that we are already living the consequences of climate change everywhere. But we will experience further and concurrent changes that increase with every additional beat of warming."
So what can be done?
While this report is more clear and confident about the downsides to warming, the scientists are more hopeful that if we can cut global emissions in half by 2030 and reach net zero by the middle of this century, we can halt and possibly reverse the rise in temperatures.
Reaching net zero involves reducing greenhouse gas emissions as much as possible using clean technology, then burying any remaining releases using carbon capture and storage, or absorbing them by planting trees.
"The thought before was that we could get increasing temperatures even after net zero," said another co-author, Prof Piers Forster from the University of Leeds, UK.
"But we now expect nature to be kind to us and if we are able to achieve net zero, we hopefully won't get any further temperature increase; and if we are able to achieve net zero greenhouse gases, we should eventually be able to reverse some of that temperature increase and get some cooling."


Five future impacts
* Temperatures will reach 1.5C above 1850-1900 levels by 2040 under all emissions scenarios
* The Arctic is likely to be practically ice-free in September at least once before 2050 in all scenarios assessed
* There will be an increasing occurrence of some extreme events "unprecedented in the historical record" even at warming of 1.5C
* Extreme sea level events that occurred once a century in the recent past are projected to occur at least annually at more than half of tidal gauge locations by 2100
* There will be likely increases in fire weather in many regions


While the future projections of warming are clearer than ever in this report, and many impacts simply cannot be avoided, the authors caution against fatalism.
"Lowering global warming really minimises the likelihood of hitting these tipping points," said Dr Otto. "We are not doomed."


A tipping point refers to when part of the Earth's climate system undergoes an abrupt change in response to continued warming.
For political leaders, the report is another in a long line of wake-up calls, but since it comes so close to November's COP26 global climate summit, it carries extra weight.




https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-58130705


Bbc news 2
Climate change: Five key takeaways from COP27
20 November 2022
1: The biggest win on climate since Paris...?
A new funding arrangement on loss and damage - a pooled fund for countries most affected by climate change - has been hailed as a "historic moment". It can be seen as the most important climate advance since the Paris Agreement at COP 2015.
For decades the victims of a changing climate were the ghosts the richer world just couldn't see.
Money has long been available to cut carbon or help countries adapt to rising temperatures - but there was nothing for those who had lost everything.
"For someone who has seen his home disappear in the floods in Pakistan, a solar panel or a sea wall isn't much use," explained Harjeet Singh from the Climate Action Network.
The COP27 decision on loss and damage won't fix that immediately.
The fund comes with many unknowns. What will be the criteria to trigger a payout? Where will the money come from, and will it be enough?
Compare the EU's €60m contribution against the $30bn costs that Pakistan faces.
* Climate costs deal struck but no fossil fuel progress
* Will richer nations pay for climate change?
But establishing the loss and damage fund is about more than money or compensation or reparations - it is really about solidarity and rebuilding trust.
Despite the dramatic impacts the rising temperatures will inflict on the world, this fund signals that no one will be left behind.
It is a concrete demonstration that we really are all in this together.
2: ...Or the biggest loss on climate change since Paris?


For many countries, the last hours of the negotiation represent a real step backwards in the fight against rising temperatures.
While the loss and damage text represented a big win, the overall cover decision is being seen as a missed opportunity in the fight against climate change.
The man who ran the COP26 negotiations in Glasgow put it bluntly.
"Emissions peaking before 2025, as the science tells us is necessary. Not in this text," said Alok Sharma.
"Clear follow-through on the phase down of coal. Not in this text."
As well as all these limitations there was also a sharp U-turn on the language around fossil fuels.
The text now includes a reference to "low emission and renewable energy".
This is being seen as a significant loophole that could allow for the development of further gas resources, as gas produces less emissions than coal.
3: The spirit of 1.5C is strong, even if the text is weak


There's a fifty-fifty chance over the next five years that we'll go over this important marker of temperature increases, compared to pre-industrial times. We're likely to pass it permanently by 2031.
But at COP27, the EU and other developed countries were willing to die on the hill of strengthening the promise to keep 1.5C alive.
Their efforts were ultimately in vain as the cover text failed to include a reference to the phasing out of all fossil fuels, seen as a necessary advance on last year's decision to phase down the use of coal.
"I wish we got fossil fuel phase out," said Kathy Jetnil-Kijiner, the Climate Envoy of the Marshall Islands, who along with other island states fear annihilation if temperatures rise above 1.5C.
"The current text is not enough. But we've shown with the loss and damage fund that we can do the impossible. So we know we can come back next year and get rid of fossil fuels once and for all."
There's a deep sense of solidarity by the richer nations with the island states on this issue of keeping below 1.5C
Faith in the threshold has also become a key differential between the US, EU and other richer countries and China, which is markedly less concerned about the goal.
While the world will undoubtedly be a better place the closer we stay to the 1.5C guiderail, belief in the ideal is also a political and economic bridge to the developing world.
So even as the science and the COP process falter on 1.5C, expect the diplomatic attachment to grow stronger in the coming years.
4: The fossil fuel industry has finally come out of the shadows
One key takeaway from COP27 was the presence and power of fossil fuel - be they delegates or countries.
Attendees connected to the oil and gas industry were everywhere. Some 636 were part of country delegations and trade teams.
The crammed pavilions felt at times like a fossil fuel trade fair. This influence was clearly reflected in the final text.
Demands from India and others for all fossil fuels to be phased down didn't survive, despite the backing of the EU and many other countries rich and poor.
Many African countries were also keen to use the COP as a platform to promote new oil and gas initiatives in their countries.
"The fact that the outcome only talks about 'phase-down of unabated coal power' is a disaster for Africa and for the climate," said Babawale Obayanju, from Friends of the Earth Africa.
"We don't need more gas extraction in Africa, devastating our communities for the benefit of rich countries and corporations. What we needed from COP27 was agreement to a rapid, equitable phase out of all fossil fuels."
That battle will resume at COP28 in Dubai.
5: Democracy really matters for the climate


The undoubted darling of the COP was Brazil's president-elect Luiz Ignacio Lula Da Silva.
Just as he did in Copenhagen in 2009, Lula electrified the conference with his promise of zero deforestation by 2030.
More than his commitment to the Amazon, Lula restored people's faith in the power of the ballot box to solve the climate problem.
So too, in his un-showy way did President Biden. The retention of the Senate by the Democrats most likely ensures that his Inflation Reduction Act will not be overturned or watered down.
At a stroke it puts the United States' carbon cutting goal for 2030 within reach.
The affirmation that democracy is an effective weapon against climate change was also demonstrated in the actions of the host country.
With security and surveillance everywhere, the conference took place in an atmosphere best described as barely restrained intolerance.
As well as the ongoing troubles over human rights, the Egyptian hosts paid scant attention to basic functional needs of a conference such as food, drink and decent wifi.
When push came to shove, there was a distinct lack of empathy from negotiators for the presidency. This really mattered in the final showdown.
COP27 could have been a major advance against climate change. That it ultimately didn't hit that mark is at least partly down to the hosts.
https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-63693738


BBC News 3
This year set to be first to breach 1.5C global warming limit
6 November 2024


It is now "virtually certain" that 2024 - a year punctuated by intense heatwaves and deadly storms - will be the world's warmest on record, according to projections by the European climate service.
Global average temperatures across the year are on track to end up more than 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, which would make 2024 the first calendar year to breach this symbolic mark.
These high temperatures are mainly down to human-caused climate change, with smaller contributions from natural factors such as the El Niño weather pattern.
Scientists say this should act as an alarm call ahead of next week's UN climate conference in Azerbaijan, COP29.
"This latest record sends another stark warning to governments at COP29 of the urgent need for action to limit any further warming," says Liz Bentley, chief executive of the Royal Meteorological Society.
A simple guide to climate change
How is climate change linked to extreme weather?
What is El Niño and how does it change the weather?
Global temperatures have been so high through the first 10 months of 2024 that only an implausibly sharp drop in the final two months would prevent a new record from being set.
In fact, it is likely that 2024 will end up at least 1.55C hotter than pre-industrial times, according to data from the European Copernicus Climate Change Service.
"Pre-industrial" refers to the benchmark period of 1850-1900, which roughly equates to the time before humans started significantly heating up the planet, for example by burning large amounts of fossil fuels.
The projection means that 2024 could surpass the current record of 1.48C, which was set only last year.
"This marks a new milestone in global temperature records," says Samantha Burgess, deputy director of Copernicus.


This would also represent the first time that a calendar year has passed 1.5C of warming, according to Copernicus data.
This would be symbolic, because almost 200 countries pledged to try to limit long-term temperature rises to that level under the Paris climate agreement in 2015, hoping to avoid some of the worst impacts of climate change.
If the 1.5C limit is breached, that does not mean the Paris goal has been broken, because it refers to average temperatures over a period of 20 years or so, in order to smooth out natural variability.
But every year-long breach brings the world closer to passing the 1.5C mark in the longer term. Last month, the UN warned that the world could warm by more than 3C this century based on current policies.
The specifics of 2024 also offer cause for concern.
Early 2024 warmth was boosted by the natural El Niño weather pattern. This is where surface waters in the east tropical Pacific Ocean are warmer than usual, which releases extra heat into the atmosphere.
This latest El Niño phase began in mid-2023 and ended around April 2024, but temperatures have remained stubbornly high since.
Over the past week, global average temperatures have set new records for the time of year every day, according to Copernicus data.




Many scientists expect the opposite, cooler phase, La Niña, to develop soon. This should, in theory, lead to a temporary drop in global temperatures next year, although exactly how this will play out is uncertain.
"We will watch with interest what happens going into 2025 and beyond," says Ed Hawkins, professor of climate science at the University of Reading.
But, with levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere still rising quickly, scientists warn it is likely only a matter of time before new records are set.
"The warmer temperatures [are making] storms more intense, heatwaves hotter and heavy rainfall more extreme, with clearly seen consequences for people all around the world," says Prof Hawkins.
"Stabilising global temperatures by reaching net zero emissions is the only way to stop adding to the costs of these disasters."




https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c1dpnxnvv2go


BBCnew 4
Climate change: Is the world warming faster than expected?
17 November 2023
Climate records have tumbled in 2023.
There have been historically high sea temperatures, worrying lows in Antarctic sea-ice, and extreme weather events hitting every continent - the latest being an "unbearable" heatwave in Brazil.
It's now "virtually certain" that 2023 will be the hottest year on record. That's something that no major climate science body expected at the start of the year.
Scientists have long known that temperatures will continue to rise as humans keep releasing record amounts of planet-heating greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, mainly through burning fossil fuels. This is the main cause of global warming.
While they are struggling to fully explain 2023's "gobsmacking" surge in temperatures, here are four additional reasons that could be behind the increases.
A 'weird' El Niño
One key factor is the unusually rapid onset of a natural weather system known as El Niño.
During an El Niño, warmer surface waters in the eastern Pacific release additional heat into the atmosphere. This typically leads to a surge in global air temperatures.
The graph below shows how a new El Niño is strengthening. It has not yet reached the peak of the last major one in 2016, as you can see, but is expected to intensify in the coming months.
But air temperatures have risen much more quickly during this El Niño than with previous ones, and it's not even reached full strength yet.
As Dr Hausfather puts it, "this El Niño is weird."
Cutting aerosols
Cutting some air pollutants - aimed at cleaning the air that humans breathe - may actually be having an unintended consequence for warming.That's because some small airborne particles known as aerosols, like sulphate or dust, tend to reflect some of the Sun's energy back into space. Generally, this cools the Earth's surface.
Regulations introduced in 2020 to encourage cleaner shipping fuels have reduced global emissions of sulphur dioxide (SO2), a harmful air pollutant for humans to breathe, by an estimated 10%.
But this appears to have raised temperatures, especially in shipping hotspots like the North Atlantic.
"We saw quite rapidly from the satellite data that less sunlight was being reflected and more sunlight was being absorbed by the oceans," explains Leon Simons, a climate researcher at the Club of Rome group.
Not all scientists agree on how important aerosols are for explaining 2023's records.
"It's hard to make the case that the [new shipping fuel] regulation in 2020 would create a sudden jump in 2023 that we didn't see in 2022," Dr Hausfather argues.
A large volcanic eruption
In January 2022, there was a huge eruption of the underwater Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha'apai volcano. The eruption plume reached an "unheard-of" 55km (35 miles) above the Earth's surface and triggered record underwater debris flows.
Importantly for the climate, it also released around 150 million tonnes of water vapour into the stratosphere. Water vapour is a greenhouse gas, like carbon dioxide, so may have added to warming.
Studies so far suggest the eruption may have only had a limited effect on global air temperatures, perhaps less than 0.05C. But scientists are still working to establish its full impact.
An Antarctic 'radiator'?
The sea-ice surrounding Antarctica is well below any previous recorded winter level, satellite data showed in September.
Arctic sea-ice has long been in decline, but until 2017 Antarctic sea-ice had largely defied predictions and remained relatively stable. This could now be changing, with consequences for global temperatures.
Fewer areas of bright, reflective ice mean more of the Sun's energy is absorbed by the darker ocean surface. In turn, this accelerates warming.
"The concern is that the Antarctic has started to operate like the Arctic," working "like a radiator rather than a refrigerant" notes Martin Siegert, from the Grantham Institute for Climate Change.
It is unclear whether the Antarctic changes are a contributor to 2023 warmth, or a consequence.
But it indicates how warming could speed up in future, Prof Siegert says.
So is the world warming faster than expected?
While the rate of warming seems to have sped up in recent decades, this has not yet consistently exceeded the range of possible temperatures that scientists expected from climate models.
This provides some reassurance that the world hasn't yet tipped into a new phase of runaway climate change.
However, a group of leading climate scientists recently warned that the climate may change more quickly than expected in the future.
They suggest that the climate is yet to fully respond to the greenhouse gases already emitted. One reason could be the artificial cooling effect of aerosols. This leaves more warming "in the pipeline" than previously thought, they argue.
Not all scientists agree with this view, but the devastating climate impacts currently being experienced highlight the challenges the world is already facing.
Ahead of the crucial COP28 climate summit, this "should really spur action to accelerate the phase out of fossil fuels," explains Lili Fuhr from the Centre for International Environmental Law.
"It doesn't have to be worse than we expected to be a huge problem that society urgently needs to deal with," says Dr Hausfather.
"Climate change is as bad as we expected. And that's bad enough."
Graphics by Mark Poynting and Erwan Rivault.
https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-67360929


The local 1
Where in Germany do homeowners face the greatest flood risk?




As extreme weather events are becoming more common and more costly, homeowners are struggling to insure their homes in certain places. The Local takes a look at insurance options and flood risks in Germany.
Recent bouts of heavy rain caused flooding and landslides in Saarland, Rhineland-Palatinate and parts of Bavaria. 
With more rain in the forecast for many parts of Germany in the coming days, these and other regions of the country may see further water and flood damages soon.
Extreme weather events are becoming both more common and more intense due to man-made climate change, and in some places this is creating havoc for homeowners. Recent reporting from the US, for example, shows that home insurance premiums have skyrocketed in some regions due to increased risks from extreme weather events.
Meanwhile, certain major insurance companies have stopped covering some regions entirely – causing some to prophesise the end of the insurance market as we know it.
While Germany doesn’t get the hurricanes or tornadoes that have made some regions in the US virtually uninsurable, it has suffered major flooding events in recent years and climate experts only expect these to get worse.
Which parts of Germany face the greatest flood risk?
A recent study by the German Insurance Association (GDV) found that 300,000 addresses in Germany are at risk of flooding.
According to the GDV study, which used public data to analyse the risk for 22.4 million addresses, the highest proportion of vulnerable properties was found in Saxony, where almost 3 percent were located in flood zones.
Most homes in Germany are not in risk zones
Generally speaking, the vast majority of homes in Germany are not considered to be in high-risk flood zones.
A spokesperson for Allianz, a leading insurance company, explained that in Germany insurers assess risk with a zoning system for flooding, backwater and heavy rain called the ZÜRS system that was developed by the GDV. 
In the ZÜRS system, each address in Germany can be assigned a classification (1-4) where class 1 is the lowest risk and class 4 is the highest risk. Class 2 suggests that a severe flood can be expected once in 100 years, class 3 suggests that a severe flood could occur once every ten to 100 years, and class 4 signifies that a severe flood could be expected every ten years.
Of about 22 million addresses classified by ZÜRS, 99.6 percent are in hazard classes 1 to 3. Specifically, 92.4 percent belong to class 1 with the lowest risk. Class 2 has 6.1 percent, class 3 has just 1.1 percent.
This leaves just 0.4 percent of German households in the highest hazard class 4, where flooding can be expected every decade.
How are flooding risks affecting house insurance?
General homeowner’s insurance (Wohn­gebäude­versicherung) or household contents insurance (Hausrat­versicherung) typically covers damages related to fire, water damage from burst pipes, burglary, robbery, vandalism following a break-in and sometimes storm and hail.
Whereas natural disasters caused by heavy rain, like flooding, landslides and avalanches are not covered by basic insurance, they may be covered by supplementary “extreme weather protection” (Extrem­wetter­schutz).
https://www.thelocal.de/20240530/how-prepared-are-homeowners-in-germany-for-heavy-rain-and-flood-risks


Flood death toll rises to 165 in Germany as search continues
Published: 19 Jul, 2021 CET.
Updated: Mon 19 Jul 2021 16:41 CET
The death toll from Germany's worst floods in living memory rose to at least 165 on Monday as emergency services continued to comb through decimated towns in search of dozens of people still missing.
A deluge of rain fell over western Germany over two days last week, sending torrents of water rushing down streets, sweeping away trees, cars and sheds, and destroying swathes of housing.
Many victims have been found dead in sodden cellars after attempting to retrieve valuables, while others were swept away by the sheer force of the water.
Emergency workers have been out in force to assess damaged buildings, clear debris and restore gas, electricity and telephone services.
In some areas, police have deployed speedboats and divers to retrieve bodies.
A total of 117 people are now confirmed to have died in Rhineland-Palatinate state, a police spokesman told AFP, with 47 victims in neighbouring North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW) and one in Bavaria.
Advertisement
"We haven't been to all the houses yet, we must assume that we will find more bodies," said Rhineland Palatinate's regional interior minister Roger Lewentz.
The number of people missing remains unclear, mainly because of disrupted communication networks.
Police in Koblenz said they were still trying to locate 170 people in Rhineland-Palatinate, after managing to get through to several hundred residents who were earlier reported missing.
The situation was similar in NRW, where police said they had been able to contact more than 700 residents who were initially unreachable. Several dozen remain missing.


German Interior Minister Horst Seehofer and Armin Laschet, the head of North Rhine-Westphalia state and the frontrunner to succeed Angela Merkel as chancellor, on Monday visited Euskirchen, one of the worst-affected towns.
On Sunday, Merkel visited the town of Schuld, calling the devastation "shocking" and calling for the world to speed up efforts to tackle the climate crisis.
Emergency aid
The disaster has catapulted climate change to the top of the agenda in Germany, ahead of September 26 polls that will mark the end of Merkel's 16 years in power.
Experts say that because a warmer atmosphere holds more water, climate change increases the risk and intensity of flooding from extreme rainfall.
Heavy rainfall has also battered southern Germany, as well as Belgium, Switzerland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Austria in recent days.
At least 31 people have died in Belgium.
The high death toll has also brought scrutiny to Germany's weather alert system and whether people in the risk zones were notified early enough. The government on Monday vowed to improve the system. 
Merkel's cabinet plans to approve an emergency aid package for flood victims on Wednesday, expected to total around 400 million euros ($470 million). The final bill is likely to be in the billions.
thelocal.de/index.php/20210719/flood-death-toll-rises-to-165-in-germany-as-search-for-missing-continues




The local 3
Should you get Germany's extreme weather emergency warning app?
The government wants to improve Germany's ability to warn residents about natural disasters and other emergencies in real time. Here's what you need to know about the 'NINA' warning app and efforts to adapt to extreme weather.
Originally developed in 2013, the NINA app is designed to warn users about natural disasters in Germany in real time.
NINA - which stands for Notfall-Informations- und Nachrichten-App (emergency information and news app) - is provided by the Federal Office for Civil Protection and Disaster Relief (BBK). It has effectively become the government's answer to the challenge of alerting residents to extreme weather events, which can escalate rapidly.
Now officials are doubling down on efforts to get more German residents on the app as part of its climate adaptation strategy.
Why the government wants to see 30 percent more NINA app users
Promoting the NINA app is part of the government's latest climate adaptation strategy, which is to be adopted by the cabinet on Wednesday.
A report on the strategy says, "Severe weather events, such as the heavy rain and flooding event in western Germany in the summer of 2021, have repeatedly shown the great importance of early and effective warning of the population."
Local and federal authorities were heavily criticised following heavy floods in western Germany in 2021 that killed almost 200 people for not alerting residents to the threat early enough.
The NINA app, as well as other apps were in place at that time, but many survivors of the flood said they hadn't received any early warnings.
Since then, the government has been vastly improving its public warning system that involves a 'cell broadcast', which is independent to the warning apps. The system is tested ever year on 'Warntag' or Warning Day.
But politicians are keen for residents to sign up and get familiar with the warning apps to receive more information on local incidents.
Advertisement
The climate adaptation report says there are "still gaps in the technical transmission of warning messages".
To reduce these gaps, the government has given itself the goal of increasing the number of users of the warning app by 30 percent by 2030. That would be an increase from about 12 million current users to 16 million by the end of the decade.
According to information shared by the BKK, if you download the app you should opt in to receiving warnings about a specific locations (for example at your place of residence and work). Or you can allow the NINA app to warn you based on your current location.
What other climate adaptation measures are planned?
Germany experienced a number of extreme weather events in 2024, from several severe floods to an increase in heatwaves, and these can only be expected to intensify as temperatures climb due to anthropomorphic climate change.
The Federal Environment Ministry's Climate Adaptation Act, which was enacted on July 1st of this year, marks the latest national effort to prepare Germany to better handle these natural disasters.
In short the law obliges the federal, state and local governments to deal with the consequences of climate change, and to identify adaptation measures. Also, to gain a better understanding of the costs involved, statistics on federal expenditure will be collected every two years from 2026.
Advertisement
Municipalities are also tasked with working to develop climate adaptations, such as creating more cooling green spaces in cities and developing heat, flooding or other disaster plans.
According to current estimates, only about 10 to 15 of Germany's municipalities and about 26 percent of its districts have such concepts so far. 
With reporting by DPA.
thelocal.de/20241210/should-you-get-germanys-extreme-weather-emergency-warning-app










Duetsche welle 1
Climate vs. economy: Do German voters need to choose?
Holly Young
02/11/2025
February 11, 2025
In the run-up to Germany's February election, some experts worry climate action is being pitted against the economy. What risks could this have for both? And does it make sense to play them off against each other?
obs, incomes and Germany's flagging economy are major focuses for the country's political parties ahead of elections this month, with many taking aim at climate-protection measures.
Friedrich Merz — leader of the center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and widely tipped to be the country's next chancellor — has said he would wind down coal and gas power plants only if it didn't damage German industry.
Even parties active on climate issues are less vocal on the topic than during 2021's election.
This has left some experts concerned that the economy is taking precedence over the climate, although research from the Climate Alliance, a German coalition of civil society groups, found most of the population would like to see more climate action.
"It is already evident that, in the run-up to the federal elections, the climate and the economy are once again being played off against each other," said Claudia Kemfert, an economist and energy expert at the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW).  
Is climate action to blame for Germany's economic woes? 
For the first time in decades, Germany's economy, the biggest in Europe, has shrunk for two consecutive years.
Its industrial export-orientated economy has been hit by high energy prices, as well as sluggish domestic demand and weak global trade. At the same time, its car industry — the iconic backbone of its economy — has announced mass layoffs and shrinking sales and profits.
Climate-change mitigation policy isn't driving this economic slump, said Gunnar Luderer, a scientist focusing on energy transition at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research. "The German economy's problems are of a structural nature, and they are deeper." 
He said a key problem has been Germany's reliance on gas from Russia, which was expensive to transition away from after Moscow's invasion of Ukraine, and that high energy prices have impacted the economy both by pushing up production costs for energy-intensive industries such as steel and chemicals, and by raising bills for individuals. 
Jobs and overlooked opportunities 
"The general claim that climate-protection measures in Germany have a negative impact on the economy is not true," said Kemfert, who argues that clever climate-protection measures create enormous economic advantages that are often underestimated.
Expanding renewables, electromobility, energy-efficient renovation and energy efficiency in the industrial sector are all measures that demand investments, which create "value and jobs," said Kemfert.
The renewable energy sector is reponsible for almost 400,000 new jobs in Germany, she added. Employment in the sector rose almost 15% between 2021 and 2022, with the solar and heat pump sectors expanding the fastest. 
"If Germany plays the economy off against the climate, there is a risk of job losses, a loss of competitiveness and high fossil-fuel costs," Kemfert said. 
Given the German economy's strength in manufacturing, machinery and the automotive sector, there are lots of economic opportunities in becoming a lead player in green technologies — such as wind power, heat pumps, e-mobility, or smart control technology to increase flexibility in energy demands, said Luderer. 
The Federation of German Industry (BDI), an association that counts chemical, engineering and electrical companies amongst its members, has itself voiced support for climate policies, arguing green technologies will be pivotal to Germany's future industrial success. 
Green technologies are key to Germany's future economic success, say experts
Experts also say the presence of renewables in the energy mix has meant the price of electricity has not risen as sharply as would have been expected, given recent skyrocketing gas prices. 
Niklas Höhne, a scientist and founder of the German research nonprofit NewClimate Institute, explains that electricity prices are pushed up by the most expensive power source in the energy mix, which are usually gas plants, while renewables continue to drop in cost around the world.
"So it's really our dependency on fossil fuels that drives electricity prices up rather than the expansion of renewables," he said.
Energy efficient renovation such as installing heat pumps could create jobs, say experts
Image: Bosch
The costs of uncertainty and inaction 
Several political parties have stated they would reverse Germany's controversial building energy act to phase out fossil-fuel heating systems, which came into force at the beginning of last year, as well as challenge the ban on new combustion engine cars in the EU by 2035. 
This political uncertainty is hindering planning security for businesses, said Stefanie Langkamp, executive director of politics at Climate Alliance. "Whenever you talk to industry, whenever you talk to trade unions, they say that this is one of the most important things for them to set their ways for the future."
She highlights the heat pump industry, which has already hired and trained new skilled workers as well as procured resources to ramp up its capacity. 
"If you do not invest in climate action today, then you face really huge consequences, both regarding the economy and also the cost of climate change," said LangkampExtreme weather such as last year's flooding is already costing Germany billions of euros annually
Image: Armin Weigel/dpa/picture alliance
The economic damage caused globally by climate change is estimated to be six times higher than the money needed to invest in measures to cut emissions and keep global heating below 2C (3.6F) above pre-industrial levels, according to a study published in the scientific journal Nature. In Germany, extreme weather such as storms and floods is estimated to have caused €7 billion ($7.2 billion) worth of damage in 2024 alone.
The world is shifting towards a climate-neutral economy in the next decades, and many advances in renewables, heat pumps, electric vehicles have already been made, said Langkamp.
"There might be different paces within some countries or some industries, but still this is a worldwide movement, and it will not stop. So this is why if you do not invest into climate action now, then you will have competitiveness problems later."
"The only option for the German economy is really to proactively embrace the challenges and opportunities of the green transition," said Luderer. "There is no way back. And the greatest risk to the German economy is to slow down the transition or to rely too heavily on old business models that are no longer viable."
Edited by: Jennifer Collins and Tamsin Walker
https://www.dw.com/en/german-election-2025-campaign-issues-climate-change-economy/a-71570873






Duetsche welle 2
Cutting through the jargon at crucial UN climate talks
Stuart Braun
12/01/2023
December 1, 2023
Climate action is complicated, and there will be lots of talk about 1.5 degree pathways, carbon budgets and loss and damage at the UN climate conference in Dubai. What does it all mean?
As the COP28 talks try to act on the climate emergency, observers will benefit from a basic knowledge of the technical climate terms and idioms underpinning the debate. Indeed, what does COP even stand for? From the Anthropocene to the UNFCCC, here's a glossary of key terms that will pepper dialogue in Dubai as the world comes together to save the planet.
1.5 C pathway
A climate mitigation pathway consistent with limiting heating to 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels by 2100. Climate scientists regard this temperature rise as the best-case warming scenario. Not just energy and transport, but economic growth, technological developments and lifestyle are factored into pathways consistent with 1.5 C of heating. 
Adaptation
Finding ways to adjust to the impacts of human-induced climate change, including extreme weather. The idea is to moderate the harm, for instance, by constructing housing away from locations vulnerable to wildfires or sea level rise. Climate finance will be vital for funding adaptation measures. 
Anthropocene
Human activity has had such an impact on the climate and the environment that it has led to the naming of a new geological epoch: the Anthropocene. The mid-20th century is regarded as the moment that human activities transformed the Earth system, especially through rapidly increasing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in the atmosphere.
Carbon budget
The amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions humanity can emit this century and still keep temperature rise to 1.5 degrees. Carbon budgets also relate to the emission limit — and associated carbon credits or permits — set as part of a cap-and-trade scheme. Entities need to surrender permits equal to their emissions. When they break their budget, they need to splash out for more credits.
Carbon capture and storage (CCS)
Reducing carbon emissions to tackle global warming by capturing the CO2 produced by power generation or industrial activity, and then transporting it to store deep underground.
Carbon intensity
A measure often used by developing countries when addressing emissions reductions, it measures the CO2 released per unit of economic output, which is most often measured as gross domestic product (GDP).
Carbon lock-in 
Existing fossil fuel-based energy systems have been so dominant that they inhibit efforts to introduce alternative energy. Carbon lock-ins happen when coal-, gas- and oil-fired energy create an inertia that inhibits the transition to zero-emission alternatives. This understanding can prompt policymakers to consider early retirement of existing high-emissions infrastructure.
Advertisement
Carbon neutrality
Balancing emitted CO2 by removing the equivalent amount from the atmosphere through sequestration in carbon sinks — including soil, forests and oceans. As these sinks are damaged, or cut down in the case of forests, emissions need to be equally cut to maintain carbon neutrality.
Carbon tax
Under a carbon tax, governments set a price that emitters must pay for each ton of greenhouse gas they emit. A carbon tax differs from carbon trading, in that it provides a higher level of certainty about cost but not about the level of emissions reduction to be achieved. 
Carbon trading 
Also known as cap and trade, this market-based incentive to meet carbon reduction targets caps greenhouse gas emissions and divides them into tradeable emission permits, or carbon credits. If a company overextends its credits, it will have to buy more from an entity that lowered emissions and has carbon credit in the bank. The lower the emissions, the lower the costs; and the higher the profit. 
Climate justice
The world's poorest and most vulnerable people, along with future generations, will suffer the worse climate change impacts. Climate justice aims to equitably and fairly share the burdens of climate change through broad investment in mitigation, adaptation and sustainable development.
Africa's inspiring climate activists
Activists in Africa are fighting hard against the effects of climate change, which is already severely affecting the continent while inspiring others to also champion environmental interests.
IDonning a neon-green bicycle helmet
Environmental activist Andy Costa from Ivory Coast is also known as Africa's cycling ambassador. He uses a variety of techniques to champion the use of bikes, including wearing a bright green bike helmet at last year's COP27 — as seen here in a meeting with French President Emmanuel Macron. He's having some success, with the first cycle paths now to be built in Abidjan, the capital of Ivory Coast.
The royal art of planting trees
She's only 10, but Kenya's youngest climate activist, Karen Kimani, has already planted 10,000 trees, most recently in the company of King Charles III in the Karura Forest on the outskirts of the capital, Nairobi. She had earlier asked the king in a letter to accompany her — and he promptly came. Her role model is Wangari Maathai, the first African woman to receive the Nobel Peace Prize in 2004.
Nigerian environmental hero
Nigerian environmentalist, poet and human rights activist Nnimmo Bassey (seen here at COP27 in 2022) has been fighting for decades against oil extraction in the Niger Delta. In 2010, he received the Right Livelihood Award, known as the alternative Nobel Prize, for his commitment to the conservation of natural resources and was also one of Time magazine's Heroes of the Environment in 2009.
'Our house has long been on fire'
When droughts and floods began to devastate communities in her home country of Uganda, Vanessa Nakate protested for climate justice. Today, the 27-year-old founder of the Rise Up movement leads international campaigns to raise awareness of the effects of climate change. She has received several awards for her work. Her book "Our house has long been on fire" was published in 2021.
Preserving forests
Agronomist Cecile Ndjebet from Cameroon has been committed to the fight for environmental protection for decades. She founded the organization Cameroon Ecology in 2000 and has since been involved in global initiatives advocating forest conservation, gender equality and land rights for women. She was awarded the Gulbenkian Prize for Humanity in 2023 in recognition of her climate defense efforts.
IStopping the sands of time
Another environmentalist who inspires young people in Africa is Aminetou Bilal. With her NGO Selfie Mbalite in Mauritania, she is committed to environmental education and combatting desertification. In 2018, she was selected as a participant in the Obama Leaders for Africa initiative. She also founded Agro Fish Farm with the aim of making fish farming more accessible for rural communities.
Putting ecosystems before profit
The founder of Fridays for Future in Senegal, Yero Sarr, opposes the extraction of natural gas in his home country. In 2022, he called on the German government to stop its plans to support a fossil fuel project there. The exploitation of natural gas deposits off the coast is damaging ecosystems, fishing, a sea turtle sanctuary and coral reefs, Sarr said.
Campaigns against global warming
The water crisis in Cape Town mobilized Ayakha Melithafa to campaign against global warming. In 2019, the South African filed a complaint with the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child alongside other stakeholders. The 21-year-old is now a member of the African Climate Alliance and a sought-after public speaker. Here, she is seen addressing the UN Sustainable Development Summit in New York.
Image: Mike Segar/REUTERS
CO2 price
As part of an emissions trading scheme, the carbon price can refer to the cost of emissions per ton, or the cost of carbon credits. The higher the carbon price, the bigger the incentive to cut emissions, meaning it is also a gauge of the economic cost of mitigation. A carbon price also refers to the rate of a carbon tax, which also puts a price on emissions.
COP
The Conference of the Parties is the supreme body of UN conventions, including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. All states that are parties to that convention are represented at the COP, during which they review implementation of targets set in the Paris Agreement, for example, and decide how to better achieve climate mitigation measures. 
Decarbonization
The process by which countries, individuals or other entities aim to achieve zero fossil fuel carbon emissions largely associated with electricity, industry and transport.
Loss and damage
A key pillar of COP climate negotiations in Egypt in 2022 was a commitment to establish a fund to compensate developing and climate-vulnerable countries hit hardest by worsening weather extremes. This loss and damage fund is to be primarily paid for by developed countries who bear the most responsibility for emissions that trigger global heating and climate extremes. 
Mitigation
Reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and increasing greenhouse gas sinks to limit global heating. This involves slashing the use of fossil fuels, the burning of which emits GHGs like CO2 and methane, among other measures. 
Net-zero
Balancing the amount of GHGs emitted with the amount removed from the atmosphere. This balancing should include actual emission cuts, not just offsets by planting trees to create carbon sinks, for example — which is sufficient for carbon neutrality.
Paris Agreement
The first-ever universal, legally binding global climate change agreement adopted at the Paris climate conference (COP21) in December 2015. It established a global framework to avoid dangerous climate change by limiting global warming to well below 2 C, and preferably to 1.5 C.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
In 1992 at the Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, 154 states signed a convention to combat "dangerous human interference with the climate system" by reducing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol first enshrined the measures under the UNFCCC, before it was superseded by the Paris Agreement of 2015.
https://www.dw.com/en/climate-glossary-cutting-through-the-jargon-at-crucial-un-climate-talks/a-59389141


Duetsche Welle 3
COP27 summit strikes historic deal on 'loss and damage' fund
Alistair Walsh | Tim Schauenberg | Giulia Saudelli
Published 11/20/2022
Published November 20, 2022
last updated 11/20/2022
last updated November 20, 2022
COP27 delegates have signed off on a final draft document. Crucially, they agreed on establishing a "loss and damage" fund that would compensate developing countries hit hardest by climate change.
Climate negotiators in Egypt ended talks in the early hours of Sunday, signing off on a final document with consensus around the break of dawn in Sharm el-Sheikh.
In a historic first, nations agreed to a fund that will help pay for damage caused by climate change to vulnerable countries. The agreement is a big win for poorer nations, who have long appealed for financial aid.
The agreement also kept alive the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit) over pre-industrial times, which scientists have warned could soon be surpassed.
The deal, however, does not include any new agreements on curbing fossil fuels or setting new targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
'In the end, we delivered,' says Egypt
COP President Sameh Shoukry, Egypt's foreign minister, praised the efforts of negotiators to reach a final agreement.
"The work that we have managed to do here in the past two weeks, and the results we have together achieved, are a testament to our collective will, as a community of nations, to voice a clear message that rings loudly today here in this room and around the world: that multilateral diplomacy still works," Shoukry said at the end of the summit.
Negotiations were scheduled to end on Friday, but disagreements over key issues led to the conference going into overtime.
Shoukry alluded to "the difficulties and the challenges of our times," but said the international community remained "committed to the fight against climate change."
Related pressures such as rising fuel prices, inflation and the war in Ukraine were seen as an additional test for this year's COP.
"As much as skeptics and pessimists thought that climate action would be taking a backseat on the global agenda, we rose to the occasion, upheld our responsibilities, and undertook the important, decisive political decisions that were not easy," said Shoukry.
He went on to acknowledge that the talks were not easy, involved work "around the clock" and were "strained and sometimes tense," but said "in the end, we delivered."
Host country Egypt faced criticism for its chaotic approach to negotiations, with allegations from negotiating parties that they were not distributing key texts and information, and even that were not acting as an honest broker.
Advocacy groups publicly accused Egypt of being heavily swayed by the oil industry, with some analysis showing increased numbers of fossil fuel lobbyists attending this year.
'Loss and damage' agreement a core breakthrough
Climate negotiators agreed early Sunday morning to establish a fund to compensate developing and climate-vulnerable countries hit hardest by worsening weather extremes.
In the final deal, it states countries "welcome the consideration, for the first time, of matters relating to funding arrangements responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including a focus on addressing loss and damage."
The issue was one of the thorniest issues at this year's climate talks.
The breakthrough came after the G77 group of developing nations, who have long called for industrialized nations to pay reparations for climate harms, had the issue added to the official COP agenda for the first time.
Full details still have to be hammered out, but the final deal calls for workshops to be held later in 2023 on how exactly the fund will function.
The agreement on climate reparations payments represented a major U-turn in the talks, after the EU softened its position near the end of the summit. Big polluters had previously resisted a specific fund in fear of being held liable for all climate-related extreme weather events.
Pakistan's climate minister, Sherry Rehman, whose country was hit by massive deadly flooding in the summer, said the fund was not "optimal," but it addressed developing nations' "basic demand" that major historical polluters such as the United States and the European Union help vulnerable countries pay for the damage caused by climate change.
1.5-degree goal remains, but no new emissions curbs
The final agreement recommits to the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit) compared with pre-industrial levels.
The EU threatened to walk away from the negotiations at one point, saying commitments on emissions cuts lacked ambition and would fail to limit warming to 1.5 C — a target reaffirmed at the Glasgow summit in 2021.
Current action has the world on track for up to 2.7 C warming, which would cause widespread drought, water scarcity, hunger and coastal flooding.
The final text, however, does not include new targets for curbing fossil fuels or capping greenhouse gas emissions.
Instead, the text calls on countries "to consider further actions to reduce by 2030 non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions, including methane." It also repeated calls for a coal "phase-down," as was agreed at climate talks in Glasgow a year prior.
India, backed by the EU and Britain, had insisted that the final text ask countries to phase down all fossil fuel use, instead of just coal. The Glasgow agreement stated a move away from "unabated" coal, with no mention of oil or gas. Unabated coal means burning the fossil fuel without carbon capture and storage.
The weaker language of a phase-down, as opposed to also phaseout, also leaves "tanker sized loopholes" for further fossil fuel projects, said Nikki Reisch, director of climate and energy at the US-based Center for International Environmental Law.
But countries such as oil and gas producing states like Saudi Arabia, the group of Arab nations and China strongly opposed a move to include all oil and gas.
The agreement also, as in Glasgow, calls for a phaseout of fossil fuel subsidies, but included the wording of a push to transition to "low emission energy systems."
This is an "opening door for continued promotion of fossil fuels instead of shift to renewable energy," tweeted Sebastien Duyck, an attorney at the Center for International Environmental Law.
Jennifer Morgan, Germany's special envoy for international climate action and former executive director of Greenpeace, said Saturday afternoon: "The European Union said we want to make sure that the most the vulnerable populations, the vulnerable countries around the world, they're the ones that are supported here through a loss and damage fund."
"We know that we have to keep 1.5 degree in sight in order to keep the losses and the damages in check."
https://www.dw.com/en/cop27-summit-strikes-historic-deal-on-loss-and-damage-fund/a-63820259


Duetsche Welle 4
How close are we to positive climate tipping points?
Martin Kuebler
12/26/2024
December 26, 2024
Amid the worsening effects of climate change, positive tipping points have the potential to help society make the green transition and shape a better future.
Tipping points have often become synonymous with climate collapse. But for scientists researching how societies can achieve sustainable change with today's knowledge and technology, tipping points can also be positive.
Transformation researchers like Ilona M. Otto, of the Wegener Center for Climate and Global Change in Graz, Austria, believe societies can introduce social changes that would help bring about a rapid green transition.
"We are talking about parts of society where rapid change is possible," said Otto. "Where we do have some degree of agency, and we can intervene in the system and push it in a desired direction."
When everyday choices around eating meat, using clean energy and driving electric vehicles are picked up by small committed groups, they can set new norms and behavior standards across societies, she said.
In a 2020 paper, Otto and her colleagues focused on six key areas that could be targeted, including energy production, financial markets, cities and education.
But these system changes often need interventions like targeted government policies or market incentives to get going. "Enthusiasm" is also important "for collective action, to bring people together," she said.
Cities could accelerate major change
Cities, home to more than half of the world's population, generate roughly 70% of global greenhouse gas emissions, according to a 2022 estimate from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
But the UN expert group also believes urban areas can lead the way in reducing emissions by lowering energy use and electrifying transport.
Adrian Hiel, who works on policy and media campaigns for Energy Cities, a network promoting the switch to climate-neutral cities, pointed to positive trends in urban transportation in Europe.
"Cycling is the big one," he said, pointing out how the COVID pandemic, in particular, accelerated a shift to bikes in places like Brussels, Barcelona and especially Paris.
"That's a massive tipping point," he said, adding that it helped to make the shift acceptable for other cities.
"The more examples you have, the easier it becomes to overcome that obstacle," he explained.
The spread of electric vehicles and solar panels in cities over the past decade likely also benefited from people showing how easy it was to make the switch.
"It's a different world when it's your neighbors talking about their passion than a company trying to sell you something,"  said, adding that addressing buildings-related emissions would benefit from the same approach.
Keeping buildings heated and comfortable accounts for around half the EU's energy every year, according to the European Environment Agency, resulting in substantial carbon emissions. While heat pumps and district heating networks are proven technologies, their cost is often off-putting.
"It is first and foremost a social challenge," said Hiel. "And that takes work, whether it's doing online surveys, going door to door — you have to put in the time and energy to listen to those people or you won't get the social transformation you need that will lead to the physical transformation you need."
Focus on 'health and well-being' can inspire green shift
Roughly 12% of global greenhouse gas emissions are generated by farming, and agribusiness and the meat industry are also major drivers of environmental degradation and biodiversity loss. And if you factor in aspects such as land clearing, the loss of peat bogs and the production of fertilizer, that number shoots up to around 30%. 
But in some parts of the world — mostly in the West — people are eating less meat, due to health reasons, environmental concerns or both. In Germany, for example — a country known for its sausages and schnitzels — meat consumption has fallen over the past decade, while plant-based alternatives continue to gain popularity.
"Many of the changes we are talking about, like active mobility and eating less meat, actually have a positive influence on human health and well-being," Otto told DW. "This could also be a potential social tipping element."
But replacing energy-intensive meat with alternative proteins derived from, for example, insects, plants and lab-grown cells is still a hard sell for many.
The Teach for All initiative, now in more than 60 countries around the world, is only a few years old. However Kuntze said it has already had an impact.
In Zimbabwe, for example, climate clubs have launched recycling campaigns and grow food for the community.
Meanwhile in Bulgaria, a school's photovoltaic system helped introduce a sustainable city design for the larger neighborhood.
And in Lebanon, many of the children who took part in the program went on to study environmental topics at university.
Citing other programs like UNESCO's Greening Education Partnership, Kuntze believes society is starting to realize the value of climate education. But to go mainstream, he said we needed to develop "an inclusive vision of the future" that prioritizes shared values and positive change — rather than a story driven by the fear of climate collapse.
"What is the kind of world we want in 2050? What is the kind of world we want in 2070? What are we working toward rather than what are we working against?" Kuntze asked.
"Education is a really critical piece of that, in that we can build that together with students and start imagining together with them what's possible."


https://www.dw.com/en/how-close-are-we-to-positive-climate-tipping-points/a-69446170


Der Spiegel 1
Germany's Stricter New Emissions Goals Present Huge Challenge
Germany's high court ruled in April that the government had to do more in the fight against global warming. The tough new emissions targets will be difficult to meet.
When the German cabinet reaches a decision about a piece of draft legislation, it’s usually little more than a formality. The ministers generally only have to raise their hands, since objections and concerns have been cleared in advance by their staff.
A bit more than a week ago, though, the vote on amendments to Germany’s climate protection act was on the agenda. And those amendments are far-reaching. They are a roadmap for Germany’s phaseout of coal, oil and gas – the fuels that drove the country’s rise to the world’s fourth-largest industrial power.
One cabinet member, though, was clearly uncomfortable with the package of amendments: Transport Minister Andreas Scheuer of the Christian Social Union (CSU), the Bavarian sister party to Chancellor Angela Merkel’s center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU). He mentioned how "difficult” the process was going to be.
The other members of the cabinet, though, said nothing in response – and raised their hands. And with that, the German climate revolution had been decided.
For decades, the German government barely moved at all when it came to climate protection, juggling concerns with objections from lobbyists and getting bogged down in the details. Suddenly, though, things are moving very quickly indeed. In one fell swoop, the governing coalition has decided the country must be climate-neutral by 2045.
DER SPIEGEL 20/2021
Bild vergrößern
The article you are reading originally appeared in German in issue 20/2021 (May 15, 2021) of DER SPIEGEL.
SPIEGEL International
The impetus ultimately came from Germany Constitutional Court. In late April, the court ruled that the Paris climate agreement’s commitment to limiting the global temperature increase to below 2 degrees Celsius amounted to a legal obligation to the next generation. Ignoring that obligation, the court found, would amount to depriving future generations their most fundamental right: freedom.
"Two weeks ago, I didn’t think it would be possible that I would be sitting here,” said a visibly overwhelmed Environment Minister Svenja Schulze of the center-left Social Democrats (SPD) following the cabinet’s decision. On the day of the high court ruling, Schulze had instructed her ministry to write a new version of the climate protection law. By 2030, greenhouse gas emissions are now to fall by 65 percent relative to 1990 levels, 10 percentage points more than previously agreed. By 2040, they are to fall by 88 percent and be at net zero five years after that.
The industrial sector, energy companies and consumers now face a major challenge. Can they meet it? Will there be social conflict? If the incoming government fails to find an affordable path into the new age of sustainability, not only could the economy suffer irreparable damage, so too could democracy. The question as to who will bear the burden of climate change will determine the battles over political distribution in the coming years.
In the best-case scenario, the climate protection act will become the biggest modernization program since the postwar period and secure prosperity for future generations. "Many political actors probably don’t fully understand the ramifications of the task ahead,” says Felix Matthes, research coordinator in the Berlin office of the Öko Institut, an environmental research institute.
According to his calculations, Germany has an emissions budget of 6.1 billion tons of CO2 left. If things continue as they are now, there will hardly be anything left for the years after 2030. For this reason, more needs to be saved sooner. "The technologies for change are available,” Matthes believes. In a study for the Climate Neutrality Foundation, he and his research team calculated the path Germany must take to achieve its targets.
The most important instrument is the price of CO2 emissions. The more expensive it is, the greater the incentive becomes to cut them. Matthes, though, believes that won’t be enough and argues that more incentivizing instruments are required to drive the shift to sustainable technologies. "Now it’s a matter of cleverly combining the mechanisms,” Matthes says, "as quickly as possible but also in a way that doesn’t leave anybody behind.” The engineer was commissioned by the German government to calculate what burdens would emerge for citizens and how these can be fairly distributed. Three areas stand out that affect everyone in the country.
Buildings
* Greenhouse gas emissions from buildings in Germany amounted to around 120 million metric tons in 2020. They are set to go down by 43 percent, to 67 million tons of CO2 equivalent, by 2030.
Almost one third of greenhouse gases in Germany are from building energy usage. Nevertheless, every year only 1 percent of the building stock is renovated to increase energy efficiency. In 2018, the rate was only 0.8 percent. DENA, the German energy agency, has stated that the pace is "far from sufficient.”
In its study, "Climate-neutral Germany 2045,” the think tank Agora Energiewende wrote that the renovation rate must now increase significantly, to 1.75 percent per year. They envision a future in which oil and gas heating systems are only used "in a few, rare cases” after 2025, with a growing focus on heat pumps. The think tank calls for 6 million of these to be in use by 2030, and 8 million more by 2045. The government already provides financial subsidies for the replacement of windows, the insulation of facades and the renewal of heating systems. When heat pumps are installed, the state covers up to 50 percent of the investment to a maximum of 30,000 euros. Nevertheless, Germany was already failing to meet its previous climate goals in the building sector.
State funding will therefore no longer suffice. More support is required – but from whom? On this issue, a social conflict is developing, primarily between tenants and landlords. Since January, the buildings sector has been included in national emissions trading, with the price of emitting one ton of CO2 standing at 25 euros, making heating oil 7.9 percent more expensive per liter and raising the cost of natural gas by 0.6 cents per kilowatt hour. Previously, landlords had been able to pass the full cost onto their tenants.
The cabinet, though, has decided that in the future, those costs are to be shared. According to a sample calculation by the Environment Ministry, a family with one child that rents their accommodation, for example, will only have to pay half of their previous fee of 86.60 euros, which is to say, 43.30 euros. But the price is set to go up quickly, increasing the burden on tenants and owners. And the owners are unhappy. Andreas Ibel, the president of the German Association for Private Real-Estate and Housing Companies, argue that owners have no influence on tenants’ electricity and heat consumption. "Someone who has the window tilted open all day in the winter while having the heating turned up to full power is literally blowing CO2 out the window.”
The Öko Institut has already calculated what owners will face when they have to pay 50 percent of the costs. Per average tenant household, it will result in an average extra cost of 100 euros per year for heating oil and 70 euros for natural gas in 2025. According to the study, the level of additional costs would initially offer homeowners little incentive to carry out additional renovations. With a higher CO2 price, however, things look different. If the price in 2030 reaches 125 euros per ton, owners would pay an additional 210 euros per year for heating oil and 160 euros for natural gas. If the price climbs to 180 euros, landlords would pay an additional 304 euros a year for heating oil and 230 euros for natural gas.
According to the study, a climate levy based on a building’s energy standard would have an additional effect: the greater the energy usage, the greater the fee. According to the authors, the owner alone should have to pay it and not be allowed to pass it onto the tenants.
Energy Supply
* In 2020, 221 million tons of CO2 were emitted for energy production in Germany. By 2030, that total is to sink by 61 percent to 108 million tons of CO2 equivalent, with the help of renewable technologies such as wind power.
The key to climate neutrality lies in producing electricity from renewable sources like solar or wind – in huge quantities at affordable prices. Much more green electricity will be necessary in the future, after all. Electric cars will have to be powered. Airplanes will rely on synthetic fuels produced with the help of renewable energies. Steel mills and chemical factories will be powered by hydrogen from green energy instead of by coal or natural gas.
Germany’s electricity needs will climb by 9 percent by 2030, according to calculations from the Öko Institut. At the same time, lignite- and bituminous coal-fired power plants are to be taken offline – plants that have supplied Germany with a significant portion of its energy mix. Initially, the phase out of coal was to be completed by 2038. "But with the new targets, we need to be done by 2030,” says Matthes. The consequence could be an enormous supply gap, with correspondingly high prices.
Current trends on the energy market intensify those developments. The price that power-plant operators have to pay for every ton of CO2 emitted has been climbing quickly for months. Emissions certificates are now going for 50 euros each, more than twice the price of just six months ago.
One might think that would be an incentive for operators to close down their fossil-fuel plants and switch to renewable energies. But bituminous coal, natural gas and even the dirtiest lignite plants have been supplying a huge share of Germany’s energy mix in recent weeks. And that is only tangentially a function of the cooler than average spring weather the country has been experiencing. The phase out of coal and nuclear limit supply, leading to lignite plants remaining online and, because of the cost of CO2 emission certificates, further driving up the already high electricity prices in the country, potentially by 50 percent by 2030, according to a study by the consulting firm Prognos.
The government has made plans to use CO2 tax revenues to lower electricity prices. But whether and when that might happen is completely unclear. Thus far, Berlin hasn’t even managed to introduce subsidies to help low-income citizens, as social organizations have been demanding for years.
The problem can only really be solved with a massive push to expand wind and solar power production. The opposite, though, is the case: Instead of the planned increase of 3 gigawatts of wind power per year, Germany has only managed 1 gigawatt. The primary reasons for the snail’s pace are incredibly long approval procedures, resistance from environmentalists and neighbors, and excessive bureaucracy.
To set up a wind park, companies like EnBW need an average of six years. That means that even the old expansion goals, calling for 65 percent of Germany’s power mix to be supplied by renewable energy sources by 2030, would not have been met. The new climate protection act calls for the share of renewable energies to be at least 70 percent, according to Matthes’ calculations.
It is hoped that a new program that the coalition government intends to pass by the end of this legislative period will alleviate that situation. But in both North Rhine-Westphalia, where CDU chancellor candidate Armin Laschet is governor, and in Bavaria, there are strict rules in place for how close wind turbines can be built to residential buildings. The state governments have thus far been wary of changing those rules for fear of protest from both residents and environmentalists. A future government including the Green Party wouldn’t be likely to change that situation. "The fronts run right through the middle of all political parties,” Matthes says.
In 2020, 146 million tons of CO2 were emitted. The goal: A decrease of 43 percent to 85 million tons of CO2 equivalent by 2030.
When it comes to the climate, no sector needs to catch up as much as transportation. Had there been no coronavirus lockdowns, the sector would have overshot the current emissions limit this past year by 15 million tons of CO2. The federal government’s tightened goals are now putting additional pressure on automakers. After spending years sleepwalking through calls for change, Volkswagen, Daimler and BMW have recently begun racing to outdo each other with their announcements about electrical cars. Volkswagen has been the most ambitious: By 2030, 70 percent of the VW cars sold in Europe are to be purely electric.
If the sector needs to be climate neutral as early as 2045, it will essentially mean that no more internal combustion vehicles could be sold after 2030, according to the consulting firm BCG. More than 90 percent of newly registered cars would have to be fully electric.
A national ban on combustion engines, as the Green Party is calling for, wouldn’t even be necessary for that to happen. Christian Hochfeld, director of the think tank Agora Verkehrswende, is calling for a drastic tightening of the fleet limit, which refers to the overall emission average across all vehicle models produced by a company. It currently stands at 95 grams of CO2 per kilometer. "By 2030, because of the new climate goals, we will need to be up to 75 percent below that,” he says. That, he adds, would be a clear signal to carmakers that they could no longer sell more that a tiny number of vehicles with internal combustion engines.
Customers also need an incentive to switch to e-mobility. The vehicle tax for combustion engines and a penalty for purchasing gas-guzzlers could have a coercive effect. But a significantly higher CO2 price on fuels would be more important. Since January, there has been a price increase of 6.9 cents per liter of gasoline and 7.8 cents per liter of diesel. If the CO2 price goes up next year from 25 euros per ton to 45 euros, as the CDU has indicated, then gasoline would become another 5.5 cents more expensive, and diesel another 6.2 cents.
The SPD rejects this plan out of concern for low-income drivers, and has managed to remove the increase from the immediate plan. But that could change if the CDU and the Greens form the next government. Still, for as long as low-income drivers do not yet own an electric car, the social costs of high CO2 prices need to be offset. This is currently being done through a commuter allowance, which would have to go up as CO2 prices rise.
Hochfeld argues that electricity costs should be lowered or a climate premium should be paid out as compensation. "We will need to continue relying on the very successful purchasing bonuses and tax rebates for purely electric company cars.” It’s true that these currently disproportionately benefit higher earners, but those cars will end up on the used vehicle market in just a few years, making them affordable for more people.
When it comes to the climate, no sector needs to catch up as much as transportation.
In the future, more trips will have to be made by foot, bike or train, or with public transportation. In some rural areas, such transportation systems must still be established, while they must be expanded in congested cities. And ticket prices need to come down. Hochfeld proposes a price of one euro per day, or 365 euros per year – a strategy already being implemented in Vienna. That, too, would be a step towards greater equity.
The Social Issue
Whether it’s housing, transportation or electricity prices, the costs of climate protection disproportionately fall on low-income earners. That can easily be seen in the portion of their incomes that must be devoted to energy costs. The effects are already felt with comparatively low CO2 surcharges, an analysis by the union affiliated Macroeconomic Policy Institute (IMK) has shown.
A price of 35 euros per metric ton affects poorer households more than well-off ones. If the levy is increased to 125 euros, as many people are calling for, the social divide would deepen: Low-income earners would lose up to 3 percent of their net household income. For the top 20 percent, it would only be a few tenths of a percent.
But the pricing of CO2 is both a problem and a solution, because the instrument doesn’t just have a strong effect on behavior, it also provides the state with billions of euros in revenue that it could return to citizens. Ottmar Edenhofer, the director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, argues that this should be done "according to social criteria.”
Edenhofer is proposing a step-by-step plan. First, the government should use its CO2 revenues to lower electricity prices, given that they represent a larger part of the household budget for low-income earners than for those who earn more. As a second step, the government should pay all citizens an equal climate premium. This would more than compensate the losses for low-income earners and thus "even shrink the gap between the poor and the rich.” He is supported in this proposal by Klaus Müller, head of the Federation of German Consumer Organizations, who goes even further. "All additional revenue from CO2 pricing must flow back to citizens, ideally per capita,” he says. He argues this would be an important step in ensuring that climate measures find broad social acceptance and don’t get targeted as a seemingly elite project, as happened with the yellow-vest protests in France.
If properly implemented, a social CO2 price would also contribute to cross-party consensus. The Greens could present themselves as climate saviors, the CDU and CSU as parties focused on the economy. And the SPD could present itself as the party of low-income earners. But what would be a positive aspect in normal times is perhaps more of a negative at the moment: The climate protection law will be followed by the campaign this summer for the upcoming federal German election. At the moment, this means consensus isn’t the priority – rather conflict. 
https://www.spiegel.de/international/business/quiet-energy-revolution-germany-s-stricter-new-emissions-goals-present-huge-challenge-a-2acf3de0-66a0-433e-8d40-1338e9cc209b


Der spiegel 2
The World Is Failing To Rid Itself of Coal
It is the most CO2 intensive of all fuels and yet consumption of it is rising dramatically, regardless of the climate crisis. We’re burning coal like there is no tomorrow. Why is it proving so difficult to phase out?
The contradictions on this planet seem even more confusing these days than usual. In Glasgow, Scotland, around 25,000 politicians, activists and advisers are trying to figure out a way to save the global climate.
The meeting is taking place in a hall with a large globe hanging from the ceiling. Blue, green and majestic, it looks like the promise of a bright future. Speaking a the summit, outgoing German Chancellor Angela Merkel heralded a "decade of action.”
DER SPIEGEL 45/2021
The article you are reading originally appeared in German in issue 45/2021 (November 6th, 2021) of DER SPIEGEL.
SPIEGEL International
And then there’s this country road in China’s Inner Mongolia region near the city of Ordos, where coal dust blows in patterns on the asphalt as if it were snow. The powder coats the branches of the puny fir trees that stand at the edge of the road. It coats the trucks thundering through in black, one truck after another, dozens, hundreds. They load their freight at the coalfield that begins less than a five-minute drive past the city limits.
Five men are observing the flurry of activity beneath them on a spoil heap, buyers looking for coal. The men are a bit tight-lipped, unwilling to say anything about their client – only that they’ve traveled from Yan’an, more than 300 kilometers away. "We visited a few pits nearby yesterday,” one of them says, disappointed. "They don’t sell us coal. It’s all reserved for big companies.”
The men are feverishly trying to get their hands on coal – and they’re not the only ones. China can’t seem to get enough coal these days. Like many other countries, China is in the midst of an energy crisis. In its distress, it, too, is falling back on old habits – it is mining, importing and burning as much coal as it can. Even on the approach to Ordos, numerous open-pit mines can be seen from the air, perforating the earth’s surface in China’s second-most important coal producing region.
Coal is the most CO2-intensive of all fossil fuels, a relic from the early industrial era, a dark past. That’s also the view of environmentalists at COP26. They argue that the world needs to eliminate its reliance on coal as quickly as possible.
But actions speak louder than words, and rather than moving away from coal, use of the fossil fuel continues to grow. Since 2000, global consumption has increased by more than 60 percent. And the boom shows few signs of abating. Climate crisis or not, coal is being burned as if there was no tomorrow.
According to forecasts by the International Energy Agency (IEA), global consumption is expected to rise by 4.5 percent this year. That would more than make up for the 4-percent decline in the pandemic year of 2020. IEA also expects coal demand in China in 2021 to approach the historic record set in 2014.
The price of Australian standard coal (Newcastle coal) quintupled to $269 per ton between September 2020 and early October 2021. It has fallen since then, but it is still three times as expensive as it was 14 months ago.
Despite all the lip service about phasing it out by world leaders, coal is experiencing a breathtaking renaissance. And it has gone largely unnoticed by the public in many locations around the world. Some countries are moving as fast to burn more coal as others are to phase it out.
DER SPIEGEL correspondents traveled around the globe to take a closer look at the situation. To China, where a global giant is trying to change direction. To Poland, where coal is a source of national pride. To Germany, which views itself as a blueprint for phasing out coal, but it could just be an example for how expensive it can be to abandon it. And to South Africa, which would like to be a pioneer, but is struggling to rid itself of its addiction.
South Africa: A Minister for Climate Destruction
When a high-level delegation of climate policymakers from the United States, Germany and the United Kingdom traveled to South Africa in September to discuss how the country could phase out its use of coal, Energy and Mines Minister Gwede Mantashe had more important things to do. The minister instead chose to attend to family matters, leaving the group to Environment Minister Barbara Creecy and other cabinet colleagues. His absence was a clear message: South Africa will not allow others to dictate how it uses its resources. Not a single member of his ministry staff turned up.
South Africa is the world’s seventh-largest coal producer. The country produced 248 million tons of coal in 2020. A staggering 86 percent of South Africa’s energy needs are met by coal. It is the world’s 13th-biggest emitter of greenhouse gases and the largest on the African continent. But that hasn’t stopped German Development Minister Gerd Müller from seeking to transform South Africa into a model country for climate change – a wonderland of renewable energies. How, though, do those two things fit together?
The team traveled to Mpumalanga, the heartland of South African coal mining and coal-generated energy. The region is located in the northeast, not far from Kruger National Park. There’s a paucity of water here, and the air is yellow. Particulate dust blows over the fields and acidic wastewater contaminates the soil. Many nearby rivers and lakes are poisoned with heavy metals. Coal makes a lot of people sick here - on the one hand. On the other, though, it provides an income for tens of thousands.
Coal is to South Africa roughly what the automotive industry is to the Germans. It’s a major source of prosperity. Fully 91,459 people worked directly in the coal industry last year, and almost a half million jobs are dependent on the mining industry. This weighs heavily in a country that has more than 34 percent unemployment and high poverty.
And the government is, indeed, divided on the issue. In contrast to his energy minister, President Cyril Ramaphosa favors a faster transition to renewable energies. He revived a climate program last year, making it easier for businesses to generate their own solar and wind power. The state-owned electricity producer Eskom also has plans to reduce the amount of coal it burns and plans to decommission the country's oldest coal-fired power plants by 2030. Coal's share of the energy mix could fall to just over 50 percent. And the chemical company Sasol, which converts coal into liquid hydrocarbons to be used as fuel, plans to cut its use of coal by a quarter by 2030.
Like many other developing countries, South Africa is struggling to meet its growing energy needs. Since 2007, power cuts to prevent power plants from getting overloaded have been a part of everyday life in the country. There are set schedules, different levels and even apps that display the times for the outages. At the highest level, Level 8, people have to go without electricity three times a day for 4.5 hours. The economic damage runs into the billions. At times, entire cities have been plunged into darkness.
More energy was needed, so wind farms were built as well as one of the largest solar parks in Africa. At the same time, the country decided to build two gigantic coal-fired power plants, each with a capacity of around 4,800 megawatts. Together, they will form the largest coal-fired power plant complex in Africa. The solar farm only produces 96 megawatts.
It’s a never-ending back and forth. Wind farms are built here, and new coal-fired power stations there. And there are always plenty of pleasant announcements, like the one from Glasgow on Thursday. Representatives of industrialized and emerging countries signed a Coal-to-Clean Statement on Thursday reaffirming their intention to phase out coal. Among the countries that did not sign on to the statement are China, India, Australia.
But the governments of Germany, Britain and the U.S. no longer want to stand by as South Africa continues to burn coal. They have decided to "support South Africa in its energy transition" and are providing the country with $8.5 billion, including just under $700 million from Germany.
So, how much would it take to steer all emerging economies onto that kind of green path? The sums are staggering. The World Bank estimates that the aid required for Asia alone would be $13 trillion. The $100 billion the industrialized nations earmarked for that purpose at the World Climate Conference seems rather modest by comparison. Especially given that this money won't even flow until 2023.
China: The Black Giant
No country is facing as many challenges in weaning itself off coal as China. The country burns more than half of all coal consumed in the world, and in 2020, it pumped 14 gigatons of CO2 into the atmosphere - 14 billion tons.
https://www.spiegel.de/international/business/troubling-addiction-the-world-is-failing-to-phase-out-coal-a-6d2007de-8196-4466-aaca-8b6a2714ec78


Speigel 3
Revolution in the energy market Pakistan's lightning-fast solar miracle 


A column by Christian Stöcker
In Pakistan, state-owned coal-fired power plants have a problem: Because solar power is cheap and more reliable, capacity grew by a factor of 28 in two years – privately financed, often purely for self-protection.
December 15, 2024, 4:15 p.m.
In Pakistan, the climate crisis is already having unmistakable deadly consequences. When temperatures in June 2024 were well above 40 degrees Celsius for days, with high humidity, hospitals in major cities like Karachi recorded a sharp increase in deaths.
Normally, the Edhi ambulance company transports 30 to 40 bodies a day to the morgues there - on June 25, 2024 alone, there were 141. Within five days, Edhi had to transport 568 bodies  , in Karachi alone. Meanwhile, the hospitals were full of patients with heatstroke symptoms, "most of them were in their 60s or 70s," a doctor told the BBC.
About the author 
Christian Stöcker, born in 1973, is a cognitive psychologist and has been a professor at the Hamburg University of Applied Sciences (HAW) since autumn 2016. There he is responsible for the Digital Communication course. Before that, he headed the Internet world department at SPIEGEL ONLINE.
Extreme heat waves are becoming more frequent everywhere, due to the climate crisis  . In India and Pakistan, temperatures are already regularly exceeding 50 degrees Celsius. And average temperatures are continuing to rise, even faster than feared .
danger for large parts of society
A human body cannot survive  high temperatures and high humidity for a long time without the possibility of cooling . "The population groups most at risk include people who work outdoors, women, children and the elderly," says an open letter  from Pakistani doctors to the Journal of Medicine, Surgery, and Public Health published in 2024.
The extreme temperatures are an existential problem  not only for the homeless  , who have no means of protecting themselves effectively from the heat - not only in Pakistan, but also in western industrial nations such as the USA  . The "Deutsche Welle" quotes  a well-off man from the Pakistani capital Islamabad, whose mother almost died in the summer heat: "If you don't have electricity, you can forget about air conditioning.  The fans don't work. The refrigerators don't work. There's not even cold water to drink."
Cover every square meter with solar modules
The electricity supply in Pakistan by the state energy suppliers is precarious. There are frequent power outages  and 40 million people have no access to a regular supply. But companies and industry are also suffering from the Pakistani energy system, which is based primarily on old coal-fired power plants and now also liquefied gas. Electricity prices there have risen by 155 percent  in the last three years . This is also due to unfortunate financing models and credit structures  .
Anyone who has the opportunity is now making themselves independent of all this. This has led to a solar boom in Pakistan that has never been seen anywhere else in the world. Without government intervention, simply due to the fact that solar modules and thus solar power have become unrivalled cheap.
"I want to cover every square meter, every bit of space, with solar panels," said the head of the global sporting goods manufacturer Forward Sports to the Financial Times  . Forward Sports produces footballs for Adidas  , making it one of the few successful export companies in Pakistan. The roofs of its factories are now turning blue.
"New feeling of security"
But it is not only factory buildings in Pakistan that are being paved with solar modules; private individuals are also becoming independent of expensive, unreliable coal-fired power on a large scale - including Shafqat Hussain, the man who is worried about his mother. He bought solar modules imported from China, put them on the roof of his house and reduced the family's electricity bill by 80 percent. There are no more power outages on hot days, and the air conditioning is running. Hussain is happy about a "newfound feeling of security." "There is no alternative in this country," the man is quoted as saying by Deutsche Welle.

Many people and companies in Pakistan see it that way. The installed capacity for solar power is expected to grow by 17 gigawatts in 2024, which is about the output of ten average coal-fired power plants - or a third of Pakistan's total electricity generation capacity.
The photovoltaic modules mostly come from China, where there is now huge overcapacity, which is causing the continued unabated price decline. According to the government,  there was 41 gigawatts of electricity generation capacity in Pakistan in 2022. Of this, 600 megawatts or 0.6 gigawatts was solar power. Now, just two years later, it will soon be 17 gigawatts, more than 28 times as much.
Threatening for energy companies
What is currently happening in Pakistan is very threatening for energy companies around the world. Because if the exploding decentralized solar production is accompanied by massive decentralized electricity storage - due to the foreseeable extremely rapid fall in battery prices - then at some point hardly anyone will need the expensive electricity from power plants, especially in sunny countries. At least outside of particularly energy-intensive industries.
Particularly in developing and emerging countries, where the electricity supply is as precarious as in Pakistan, developments will take place in the coming years that hardly anyone in Germany has foreseen. In this country, people continue to tell each other that the expansion of renewable energies is a "German solo effort."
In sub-Saharan Africa, around 600 million people still live without electricity. It is highly likely that many of them will be supplied directly with solar power in the future, because no one would be crazy enough to build coal or even nuclear power plants there. And all this despite the fact that current investments in the transformation of the energy system are considered to be far too low  . It would make a lot of sense if Europe did more to change this . Low-interest loans for clean energy supplies would be development aid and climate protection in one. If we don't do it, China will.
The bad banks of the energy system
In places where there is a lot of coal capacity, the rapid development is causing economic problems for the operators of the old energy system. In Pakistan, there is now talk of limiting the expansion of solar power because the collapse in demand caused by self-produced electricity is endangering the electricity grid as a whole. Pakistani Energy Minister Awais Leghari told the Financial Times: "Demand is shrinking from the electricity grid. That is very worrying."
https://www.spiegel.de/wissenschaft/mensch/energiewende-pakistan-und-das-blitzschnelle-solar-wunder-a-eae8c326-3429-42e9-b4ec-53e77761a56a




Spiegel 4 
Black Gold Rush in Guyana Is the World Really Ready to Abandon Fossil Fuels?
World leaders insist it is time to leave the fossil fuel era behind. But oil companies are making more money than ever before. A new project off the coast of Guyana shows why the energy transition remains more of a dream than reality.
By Susanne Götze und Claus Hecking in Georgetown, Guyana
11.12.2023, 15.07 Uhr
"There's the new Guyana! Guyana with oil!,” Nicholas Deygooo calls out as the boat heads towards his artificial island. "It wouldn’t be possible without Exxon!” The 41-year-old owner of the new speck of land gestures grandly toward his construction project with both arms. It's worth $300 million, but Deygoo didn’t have to invest even a cent of his own money.
Within just a few months, floating dredgers created some 44 acres of new land, roughly the size of 24 football fields. Such a thing has never been seen before in Guyana, the sparsely populated country on South America’s Atlantic coast, sandwiched between Venezuela and Surinam. The excavators dug up tens of thousands of tons of sand from the seafloor and deposited it here, near the sleepy capital of Georgetown. A few common lanceheads and killer bees have already migrated over from the jungle to Deygoo’s artificial island, which has been given the unromantic name VEHSI.
But Guyana’s fauna doesn’t have much of a future here. The island reeks of diesel, which fuels the heavy machinery. Steamrollers are packing down the sandy ground, diggers are excavating foundations and cranes are moving building supplies. Guyana’s first deepwater port is scheduled to open here even before the new year – a timeline laid out by its only customer, tenant and financier: ExxonMobil.
The world’s largest private oil and natural gas behemoth advanced the entire investment sum to Deygoo and his partners. They are demanding no interest, essentially a means of paying the rent for the coming years. The company urgently needs the deepwater harbor as a logistical hub for its oil drilling operations 200 kilometers off the coast of Guyana. The company’s U.S. executives and the country’s political leadership want to expand production as rapidly as possible before climate protection measures get in the way.
Guyana is the current El Dorado of the oil industry. Enormous oil reserves were discovered off the coast here in 2015, shortly before 200 countries agreed to the Paris Climate Agreement, which was to herald the end of the fossil fuel era. Huge quantities of first-class "light sweet crude” are buried below the ocean floor, highly valued for its low sulfur content and the relative ease with which it can be refined. It’s the best kind of crude oil around. The discovery has even led Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro to move to annex part of Guyana’s territory to enable it to undertake its own drilling operations.
According to the plans forged by ExxonMobil and Guyana’s government, the country will produce more crude oil per capita than any other country on the planet within five years. Despite the fact that the climate crisis poses a greater threat to Guyana than almost any other country in the world.
Still, hardly anyone here is in favor of simply leaving the oil in the ground, certainly not the country’s political leaders or Deygoo. But even environmental activists support the exploitation of the oil fields now that fossil fuel multis have begun funding local projects. Such funding, though, is a pittance compared to the billions of dollars that the oil will produce. It is a triumph for ExxonMobil and the other companies involved.
In recent years, it looked for a time as though humanity was serious about ending its reliance on fossil fuels. A young movement, led by Greta Thunberg, brought millions of people around the world out onto the streets. "Keep it in the ground,” they chanted, referring to oil, natural gas and coal.
One government after the next pledged that their country would be carbon neutral by the middle of the century. When the coronavirus pandemic kept millions of people from commuting to work or flying around the world, the prices for oil and for oil company stock plunged. Black gold briefly lost its luster.
“With current energy policy, we will not only miss the 1.5-degree goal, we will even miss the 2-degree goal."
Fatih Birol, International Energy Agency
But now? According to a data analysis performed by the London-based Energy Institute on behalf of DER SPIEGEL, humanity has never before burned as much fossil fuel as it is currently. The analysis shows that in 2022, 137 trillion kilowatt hours-worth of oil, coal and natural gas was consumed, more than ever before. "Despite record growth in renewables, the share of fossil fuels in the global energy supply remains stubbornly at 82 percent," says Juliet Davenport, president of the Energy Institute. "The transition is not progressing quickly enough.”
That's why global emissions of greenhouse gases were higher in 2022 than ever before. And this year, they could be even higher. Temperatures around the world are spiking dangerously, flooding and forest fires are growing more and more catastrophic, and Thunberg’s Fridays for Future movement appears to be disintegrating.


With current energy policy, we will not only miss the 1.5-degree goal, we will "even miss the 2-degree goal,” says Fatih Birol, head of the International Energy Agency. "The trend amounts to 2.4 degrees.”
Meanwhile, oil, natural gas and coal companies are doing booming business. And their lobbies are working hard to ensure that it stays that way for as long as possible.
According to the German environmental protection agency Urgewald, 96 percent of the roughly 700 oil and natural gas companies they examined are searching for or developing new deposits. Of those, 539 are currently working to produce crude oil and natural gas amounting to 230 billion barrels (each containing 159 liters) of oil equivalent from as yet untapped deposits. This amount is the equivalent of six years’-worth of consumption at current rates.


The center of this global oil bonanza is Guyana, a poor country rife with corruption. "When I was a child, even toast bread was often not available,” says Nicholas Deygoo, the owner of the new island.
In the capital of Georgetown, both the old and the new Guyana are on full display. A horse-drawn wagon is passed by an SUV as cows graze next to a McDonald’s. In the center of the city, two rather dilapidated colonial-style wooden homes flank the ExxonMobil headquarters, a seven-floor high rise made of glass, steel and cement.
From there, the man many people refer to as the "King of Guyana” can look down at the Ministry of Natural Resources, which is located on the same street. From Britain, 56-year-old Alistair Routledge is ExxonMobil’s representative in the country. "These are the most important conventional oil and gas discoveries of the last 20 years in our industry," he exults. The company believes that the deposits off the coast of Guyana contain at least 11 billion barrels of oil equivalent, more than the amount off the coasts of Norway and the UK combined. At current prices, the country’s oil has a market value of $750 billion.
And Guyana’s government is eager to get its hands on the petro-billions. The money would allow them to further develop the country. It would be enough to replace the country’s pothole-ridden roads with wide, newly paved highways in addition to building bridges, hospitals and schools.
The country’s politicians are in a hurry. "It is a race against time,” the country’s president, Irfaan Ali, recently told Al Jazeera in an interview. "We intend to accelerate production.” Ali and his team are concerned that climate rules and new technologies could soon weaken demand for crude oil and devalue his country’s treasure.
Plus, the government also needs the money for the fight against climate change.
Nine of 10 citizens of Guyana live along the Atlantic coast behind more than 400 kilometers of dikes. In some places, salt water has already begun spilling over the barriers and ruining the soil. Sea levels are rising in the region more rapidly than elsewhere, and Georgetown has been located below sea level for centuries.
The old port of Georgetown is full of activity these days.
Foto: Claus Hecking / DER SPIEGEL
The capital was once built on swampland, crisscrossed with canals and ditches dug by the country’s former colonial masters from the Netherlands. Even today, locals occasionally see anacondas swimming in the trenches. Among global cities threatened by flooding, Georgetown is right toward the top of the list. The government is planning to build a new capital on higher ground further inland called Silica City.
Guyana also demonstrates the failures thus far of the so-called loss and damage approach, the idea that industrialized nations would provide financial support to countries that are particularly threatened by climate change. In 2009, industrialized nations pledged $100 billion per year in aid, a sum that still hasn’t been achieved today.
Guyana no longer wants to wait. "We need money from the oil and gas sector to climate-proof our country and adapt to climate change,” Vice President Bharrat Jagdeo told the Wall Street Journal in an early November interview.
“The oil and gas industry is facing a moment of truth."
Fatih Birol, head of the International Energy Agency
The big oil companies are pushing ahead. ExxonMobil, Hess and the China National Offshore Oil Corporation have thus far committed to investing at least $40 billion in the Guyana project.
By contrast, the entire sector hardly spent more than $20 billion for renewable energy projects like solar and wind parks last year, according to the International Energy Agency – a number representing just 2.5 percent of capital expenditures. The sector invested almost 40 times that amount in fossil fuel projects. Their traditional business model is apparently still working so well that the oil companies see no reason to invest significant amounts in anything else.
"The oil and gas industry is facing a moment of truth,” says IAE head Birol. "It has to decide between fueling the climate crisis or participating in the transition towards clean energy.”
“It’s about reducing the emissions from hydrocarbons rather than cutting production."
Amin Nasser, CEO of Saudi Aramco
It is a windy October morning in the Westminster quarter of London. Violet smoke is climbing into the sky in front of the InterContinental Hotel while Greta Thunberg and other climate activists are chanting "Oil Money Out!”, their voices echoing across Hyde Park next door. The activists have their arms linked and are blocking the entrance to the luxury hotel. None of the participants in the Energy Intelligence Forum, one of the fossil fuel sector’s largest meetings, can get in or out.
The meeting of the oil and gas magnates, though, has long since started. The activists outside have proven unable to affect even the timing of the agenda. The lush carpeting swallows up the chanting in front of the hotel and the executives can continue their conversations unbothered, claiming that their interests and the climate crisis are in no way contradictory.
"It’s about reducing the emissions from hydrocarbons rather than cutting production,” says Amin Nasser, head of oil giant Saudi Aramco. Carbon emissions of oil and natural gas, he insists, can be reduced using technologies such as carbon capture and sequestration (CCS). Renewable energies alone cannot "shoulder the global demand for energy,” he says.
$161.1 Billion in Profits in a Single Year
Many people here agree with Nasser. For a number of fossil fuel companies, last year was the most successful in their histories, their profits boosted in part by Russian President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and the ensuing energy crisis, which drove up prices.
Together, the Big Five – the five Western oil and natural gas giants ExxonMobil, Chevron, BP, Shell and TotalEnergies – made profits of almost $200 billion. The state-owned Saudi Arabian company Saudi Aramco earned $161.1 billion in profits. And the world’s largest private coal producer Peabody Energy from the U.S. – a company that was facing bankruptcy just a few years ago – earned more money in 2022 than ever before.
In the years following the Paris Climate Agreement in 2015, the companies also continued exploiting oil, natural gas and coal deposits as though climate change didn’t exist at all. According to a data reporting project of which DER SPIEGEL was a part, more than 70 especially large fossil fuel projects got going after 2015, such as the one in Guyana and the development of natural gas fields above the Arctic Circle in western Siberia, each of which will produce at least a billion tons of carbon emissions over their lifetimes.
The data reporting was conducted together with scientists and enjoyed support from the French non-profit Data for Good and from the collective éclaircies. Publicly available information found in databases, studies and financial statements about oil, natural gas and coal projects from almost 900 companies was examined. An additional 128 huge projects were found to be in the planning stages. If all of the plans laid by the energy companies become reality, they would – according to a conservative estimate – emit almost twice the carbon budget remaining for limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius.
“Fossil fuels are so comfortable."
James Hansen, climate researcher
"As there is high demand for oil and gas, it may be necessary to replace older fields with decreasing amounts of production with new sources,” says Birol, of the IAE. But, he adds, "their investments in new oil and gas fields are much higher than would be necessary to keep production at the current level.”
Will it not be possible in the end to wean the world from its addiction to oil, coal and natural gas? "Fossil fuels are so comfortable,” says James Hansen, the long-serving climate expert for NASA. One gallon of gasoline contains as much energy as an adult performing 400 hours of manual labor, he says. And much of today’s infrastructure is configured for fossil fuels: power plants that run on coal, vehicles and airplanes that run on diesel, gasoline and kerosene, industrial processes that rely on natural gas.
And the climate-damaging fuels are also heavily subsidized. According to the IAE, governments worldwide spent more than a trillion dollars on such subsidies in 2022.
Back at the energy conference in London, Patrick Pouyanné, the head of the French company TotalEnergies, is on stage gushing about the future of fossil fuels. He goes on and on about Total’s net profits of $36 billion, about expected growth in the oil and natural gas industry at least through the end of the decade and about new discoveries and projects, just as in Namibia. "It is great that in the 21st century, we can still find and exploit such a productive oil field.”
Pouyanné, though, does not see himself as an adversary to the crowd outside the hotel. "We must give the people out there an answer,” he says. His answer is minimizing emissions during the exploitation of fossil fuels, such as the release of methane, which is an even more potent greenhouse gas that is released during oil production and is often simply pumped into the atmosphere. Pouyanné envisions avoiding such emissions in the future. It wouldn’t cost much.
He also says that he would like to accelerate the shift to renewable energies, produce hydrogen and promote the electrification of vehicle traffic. Economic interests, he says, demand as much. Still, he says: "We will continue to rely on oil and gas for quite some time.”
The president of the ongoing World Climate Summit COP28, Sultan Al Jaber, argues similarly. His main job is as CEO of the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC), the second-largest oil company in the world.
“If Britain, Norway and the U.S. got rich with oil production, why are they expecting from Guyana that we leave our oil in the ground and remain poor?”
Arianne Arjoon, environmental activists
"Maximum energy, minimum emissions” is the motto that Al Jaber recites at almost every opportunity. He doesn’t, however, talk much about how that is supposed to work. The emissions-reduction technologies touted so energetically by the fossil fuel sector – such as CCS or filtering CO2 out of the atmosphere – are anything but a comprehensive solution. They wouldn’t even be able to sink current global carbon emissions by 1 percent. And even if the technologies did ultimately become effective for large-scale use, they would require huge amounts of energy – more than the world’s entire current electricity production, according to the IAE.
"In 2023, the industry will invest around $4 billion in CCS,” says Birol. "In order to catch the fossil emissions on a large scale, it would have to spend about 1,000 times as much in the future, around $4,000 billion – every year.”
Instead of investing in changing their business models, some energy companies have shown a preference for changing their communications strategies. "U.S. PR companies, oil and natural gas concerns, the automobile industry and the petrochemical sector have joined forces to develop campaigns and programs centered on sustainability, with the goal of telling the world that the fossil fuel industry is part of the solution,” says Melissa Aronczyk, professor of media sciences at Rutgers University in New Jersey. "Fossil fuel companies have been trying to get involved since the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in 1992.”
Two subway stations down from the European Parliament in Brussels, fossil fuel lobbyists are working to leverage enough space for oil and natural gas in the Green Deal announced by the European Commission. It is the headquarters of the International Association of Oil & Gas Producers in Europe (IOGP). The organization represents all leading Western oil and natural gas companies, from Shell and BP to TotalEnergies.


https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/black-gold-rush-in-guyana-is-the-world-really-ready-to-abandon-fossil-fuels-a-9489ea00-a062-42f9-a882-a9de8501fc06




News 24 1 Africa
Is climate change to blame for the California wildfires?
The "Pyrocene" is upon us. At least, that is the theory which was first introduced by fire historian Stephen Pyne in a 2015 essay.
United States Forest Service ecologist Gavin Jones described the Pyrocene in a 2023 interview with The Explorers Journal as the current era in which humans experience greater fire activity than before. The key driver – human activity.
The wildfires currently ripping through suburbs of Los Angeles in California and beyond have claimed at least 11 lives so far as well as more than 30 000 acres of land and more than 10 000 buildings. They are the most destructive wildfires in the history of the state.
As wildfires become more frequent each year around the world, concern from climate scientists that climate change is making them worse is mounting.
READ | Los Angeles investigates cause of fires as curfew enforced
California's Governor Gavin Newsom said in a video he posted on X on Wednesday that there is no longer a fire "season" in California. "It's year-round in the state of California."
Pyne, an emeritus professor at Arizona State University's School of Life Sciences, agrees. He told Al Jazeera that we now "have to live with a fire age, the fire-informed equivalent to an ice age".
Has climate change contributed to the California wildfires?
It is very likely, according to many experts.
The planet is warming to record-breaking levels, scientists warn. The European Union's Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) confirmed on Friday that 2024 was the first full year where global temperatures exceeded pre-industrial levels by 1.5 degrees Celsius.
C3S said the climate crisis is pushing the world to temperatures never before experienced by modern humans.
Climate change has contributed to an increase in the frequency, season length and burned area of wildfires, according to a report by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
As a result of all this, says Pyne, global warming is "adding energy to the system, magnifying the wet and dry spells, lengthening the fire season, ramping up all the [already powerful] elements that contribute to California's firescape".
READ | Earth records hottest ever year in 2024 and crosses key 1.5°C threshold
How does climate change trigger wildfires specifically?
The exact causes of the California fires, which began on Tuesday in the Palisades area of Los Angeles, are unknown and under investigation.
"But they are human," Pyne says. "They might be directly related to people [malice, carelessness] or indirectly [say, through faulty power lines]. For the moment the origins are unclear."
Experts say, however, that it is likely that a combination of environmental factors created the optimal conditions for the calendar-defiant fires to spread as rapidly as they have.
For one thing, southern California has not seen significant rainfall for months.
The US Drought Monitor's latest map shows that as of 7 January, only 39.1% of California is completely drought-free. The rest of the state is described as "abnormally dry" and some areas are experiencing "moderate to exceptional" droughts.
At about this time last year – as of 2 January 2024 – 96.7% of California was classed as drought-free. Furthermore, only 3.4% of the state was abnormally dry and no parts were experiencing drought of any severity.
The extremely dry conditions cause the vegetation to become extremely parched and therefore highly flammable.
Besides this, Los Angeles has an abundance of other flammable materials in its infrastructure, such as low-hanging power cables and wooden telephone poles.
Hot Santa Ana winds have also gusted in from the interior of the region towards the coast and offshore, further dehydrating the vegetation, say experts. When vegetation is so dry and conditions are so flammable, any spark can start a fire, be it a burning cigarette butt, vehicle or power line.
Are other natural disasters linked to climate change?
Yes. The changing climate coupled with poor urban planning and management has exacerbated natural disasters globally, including cyclones, hurricanes and floods.
Scientists at the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) believe that if planet temperatures exceed the pre-industrial average by 2°C, hurricane wind speeds could rise by 10%.
They also say that climate change might be slowing the pace – rather than the velocity – at which hurricanes move. This means that storms can dump more water on the places they pass through.
Warm oceans help cyclones intensify rapidly, Roxy Mathew Koll, a climate scientist at the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology in Pune, told Al Jazeera in April 2023.
In October last year, the World Weather Attribution (WWA) said that climate change caused by fossil fuel use had increased seasonal rainfall across the Niger and Lake Chad basins by between 5% and 20% in 2024, causing more flooding.
Asian countries have also experienced intense floods in recent years. In April 2024, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) published a report that found Asia has been warming faster than the global average.
WMO chief Celeste Saulo said in a statement that "many countries in the region experienced their hottest year on record in 2023, along with a barrage of extreme conditions, from droughts and heatwaves to floods and storm". She added that the "frequency and severity of such events" was exacerbated by climate change.
Will these events become worse if climate change is not tackled?
Wildfires are expected to worsen with time as a result of climate change and changing land use, according to a 2022 report by United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and its partner, environmental communications centre, GRID-Arendal.
The report projected that extreme fires worldwide will increase by as much as 14% by 2030, 30% by the end of 2050 and 50% by the end of the century.
Furthermore, wildfires damage the environment in other ways, too. In terms of the California fires, "when (and if) winter rains finally arrive, they could lead to hillside erosion and debris flows", Pyne said, suggesting that cleanup after the fire "will be messy, long and expensive".
Conditions created by humans have also made it difficult to cope with the fallout of environmental disasters.
Pyne said "contemporary houses are filled with plastics, synthetics and electronics that can be toxic" when they go up in flames.
How do wildfires affect wildlife?
Wildfires burn away acres of land rapidly and can have different effects on wildlife inhabiting fire sites.
The effects depend on the type of wildlife and its habitat requirements, and the intensity and frequency of the wildfires, according to an article published by North Carolina (NC) State University.
Some species can quickly escape as a fire quickly engulfs acres of land. "Some animals, especially those that are immobile or too slow to escape, are more vulnerable to the smoke and heat of wildfires," it explains.
Does that affect the environment generally?
It could. As wildfires change vegetation by thinning it, some wildlife can lose their habitat, and the resulting movement of wildlife can throw off the balance of a local ecosystem in a region.
Take snakes as an example. Some 33 snake species are endemic to California.
Michael Starkey, a conservation biologist whose work focuses on snake conservation told Al Jazeera that rising temperatures and dry conditions are making some regions uninhabitable for some snake species.
Starkey said that while some snakes can move away, other species could go extinct. This is a problem because snakes eat rodents which destroy crops for human consumption. This chain reaction can affect entire food systems.
California is also home to 700 vertebrate species, which simply put, are animals with backbones and skeletons. This makes the state the US's most biodiverse, according to an article published by the US Department of Agriculture in March 2024.
Record-breaking wildfires engulfed California in 2020 and 2021, burning more than 4.2 million acres of land.
"Tragically, the bushfires killed or displaced almost 3 billion animals. It made me wonder what was happening to our wildlife," the US Forest Service ecologist Jones was quoted as saying in the US Agriculture Department article.
Pacific Southwest Research Station Ecologist John Keane said that spotted owls are a particular species of concern, according to the article. "Wildfire disasters can destroy old-growth trees and dense forest patches upon which spotted owls depend for nesting, roosting, and foraging."
https://www.news24.com/fin24/climate_future/news/is-climate-change-to-blame-for-the-california-wildfires-20250111


News 24 2
How climate change is making us sick - and rich countries don’t want to pay up
nly about one in three governments — 35% — pointed out the impact of climate change on their citizens’ health in their yearly United Nations (UN) Debate statements in 2023 — down from 50% in 2022, according to the latest edition of the Lancet Countdown report on health and climate change. 
During UN General Debate sessions governments address the General Assembly — the body’s main policymaking unit — about issues in world politics they believe should be prioritised and require international action. 
But public health experts at the world’s largest annual climate change meeting, of which the 29th gathering — COP29 — is taking place in Baku, Azerbaijan until next week, warn that government leaders who are negotiating by how much their countries need to cut carbon emissions are actually negotiating with people’s health.    
"Climate change is making us sick," said Maria Neira, director of environment, climate change and health at the World Health Organisation (WHO) at a press conference on Tuesday.
"It’s affecting the way in which we are producing food, how polluted the water we drink and the air we breathe are, it influences who gets displaced, how heatwaves are now killing people around the world, and of course, it impacts our mental health."  
The Lancet’s newest report found that, in South Africa, babies and adults older than 65, for whom climate change is worse, endured between five and six heatwave days — when the weather is abnormally hot — in 2023, compared with three such days per year in the previous decade. 
And, because exposure to heat also makes people less productive, this has translated into 181-million potential work hours lost last year — an increase of 34% from the 1990–1999 average. Construction workers in South Africa were hit the hardest, the report found, with about half of their potential work hours lost — and with that their income too. 
South Africa is currently at the beginning of one of its hottest summers ever, says the SA Weather Service, and it’s right in line with what the rest of the world is experiencing.
According to the World Meteorological Organisation’s State of the Climate 2024 Update, released at COP29, 2024 is on track to be the warmest year on record.
The January—September 2024 global mean temperature was 1.45°C above the pre-industrial average, dangerously close to the 1.5°C rise in temperature that 196 countries, including South Africa, who signed a legally binding agreement in Paris in 2015, pledged not to exceed in order to avoid the catastrophic consequences of more floods, droughts and illness.
For that to happen, states need to ramp up their efforts to cut warming gases — but that costs a lot of money, because they have to ditch fossil fuels — coal, oil and gas — and rather use solar or wind energy to generate power. That’s because burning coal and oil releases lots of greenhouse gases into the air, which forms a type of blanket around the Earth and makes the air warmer and warmer. 
COP, which stands for conference of the parties (the countries that have signed theUN Framework Convention on Climate Change, the UNFCCC, in 1992), is the decision-making body for all things climate change. Leaders from signatory countries are at COP29 to fight out who needs to pay what to stop the Earth’s atmosphere from heating up further.
And it’s a fight for justice.
Because wealthier countries are more industrialised than poorer states, they’ve emitted considerably more greenhouse gases into the air than their developing counterparts, and have therefore contributed the most to climate change.  
"This is a story of avoidable injustice. The rich cause the problem; the poor pay the highest price," UN secretary general António Guterres, said at the opening of the World Leaders Climate Action Summit at this year’s conference on Tuesday. 
In a study released just two weeks before COP29 kicked off, Oxfam found that “the richest billionaires emit more carbon in an hour and a half than the average person does in a lifetime”. Unless emissions plummet and adaptation soars, said Guterres, “every economy will face far greater fury”.
Countries at COP29 have to agree on how much, and through which channels, wealthy countries will have to pay to help emerging economies like South Africa move to greener forms of energy — and fund plans to prepare for the devastating consequences of floods and droughts as a result of it.
And the president-elect of the country that emits the most greenhouse gases per person — the United States — isn’t in Baku. He’s called climate change a "hoax" and a "scam" and, the New York Times reports, is likely to, for a second time (after his first presidency between 2017 and 2021) pull out of the Paris Agreement, and “abandon plans to give financial aid to poor countries”. 
Meanwhile, it’s not just the environment, but also people’s health that’s suffering — and that goes far beyond heat-related diseases.
Here’s five reasons why:
Heat will make life risky for new moms and their babies
Less than 3% of funds to combat climate change focus on things that can keep pregnant women and kids safe, a Unicef report shows. "Yet children are 30% of the world’s population — and 100% its future," said Abheet Solomon, who leads the Healthy Environments for Healthy Children programme at the UN agency, at Tuesday’s press conference.
During pregnancy, a woman already struggles to keep cool because of the changes in her body to support the growing foetus. Add extra heat from outside, like on very hot days or during a heatwave, and it becomes even more difficult. Because of the chain of chemical reactions that follow, the chances of early labour, miscarriage, stillbirths or birth defects rise, shows yet another big analysis, published in Nature Medicine last week.   
Infectious diseases will spread easier — or crop up where they’ve never been
As weather patterns change, how far and fast germs spread will change too. For example, in Africa, the mosquitoes which carry the parasite that causes malaria have, since the start of the 1900s, steadily crept northwards from their original tropical climes. They’ve also slowly moved into higher-lying areas (where it was previously too cold for mosquitoes to survive). This means that malaria could become widespread in the highlands of East Africa — where it previously was uncommon.
But it’s not only diseases carried by insects that will become more widespread. Floods and storms, which experts say will worsen as the climate changes, can wash roads away and stop people from getting to a clinic. When someone with HIV or tuberculosis, for instance, can’t carry on taking their medicine, the germs causing these diseases can start multiplying in their bodies again and make it easier for the disease to spread. 
Breathing could become a struggle
Some of the gases making the Earth hotter are also polluting the air. For people who already have a lung problem (say,asthma orchronic obstructive pulmonary disease — in which the airways narrow and so make someone short of breath), breathing could become even harder when it’s very hot. That’s because your body struggles to deal with heat when you already battle to breathe, Caradee Wright, a public health specialist who leads the Climate Change and Health Research Programme at the Medical Research Council, told Bhekisisa last year.
It’s a double whammy for people who live in areas with dirty air, such as in Secunda in Mpumalanga, where chemical plants and power stations billow greenhouse gases, sulphur dioxide and tiny bits of solids into the air. 
Many (more) people will go hungry
Climate change is already making it hard for people to get enough to eat to stay healthy, the new Lancet Countdown report shows. It’s not only that extreme weather events like droughts or severe storms destroy crops, but in future, farmers could also struggle to grow enough food.
A 2021 modelling study, for example, shows that because of warmer conditions and erratic rainfall linked to human activities, the world’s farming yields dropped by 20% over the last 60 years. This, the authors say, is the same as if the amount of food produced by farmers is stuck at the level it was in 2013 — only the planet’s population grew by almost 600-million people between 2013 and 2020.
Even when there is enough food available, people may not be able to get it or safely store and cook it when severe weather hits, as researchers found in the aftermath of the disastrous floods in KwaZulu-Natal in 2022. 
Stress about climate change will get people down
In a large study published in 2021, more than half of the 10 000 under-25s asked about how climate change makes them feel said they experience negative emotions like anxiety, sadness, guilt and feeling powerless. Three out of four young people are frightened about the future.
But worries about the future’s climate is only one part of what gets us down, says Collins Iwuji, a principal investigator on a Wellcome Trust-funded study about the effects of floods on people’s mental health in four African countries, including South Africa.
For example, when a destructive flood hits, people can lose their home, jobs or family members "in the blink of an eye". This sudden loss creates a feeling of despondency, he says, and when people have to flee their homes on top of that, they often lose their social support networks too. It’s not hard for serious problems like anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder — a mental health condition caused by a terrifying event — to set in and, says Iwuji, "this can persist for years".
https://www.news24.com/fin24/climate_future/environment/how-climate-change-is-making-us-sick-and-rich-countries-dont-want-to-pay-up-20241114




Times live 1
EXPLAINER | COP29: What is the latest science on climate change?
This year's UN climate summit — COP29 — is being held during another record-breaking year of higher global temperatures, adding pressure to negotiations aimed at curbing climate change.
The last global scientific consensus on climate change was released in 2021 through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. However, scientists say evidence shows global warming and its impacts are unfolding faster than expected.
Here is some of the latest climate research:
1.5ºC BREACHED?
The world may already have hit 1.5ºC of warming above the average pre-industrial temperature — a critical threshold beyond which it is at risk of irreversible and extreme climate change, scientists say.
A group of researchers made the suggestion in a study released on Monday based on an analysis of 2,000 years of atmospheric gases trapped in Antarctic ice cores that extends the understanding of pre-industrial temperature trends.
Scientists have typically measured today's temperatures against a baseline temperature average for 1850-1900. By that measure, the world is now at nearly 1.3ºC of warming.
The new data suggests a longer pre-industrial baseline, based on temperature data spanning the year 13 to 1700, the study published in the journal Nature Geoscience said.
Either way, 2024 is certain to be the warmest year on record.
SUPERCHARGED HURRICANES
Not only is ocean warming fuelling stronger Atlantic storms, it is also causing them to intensify more rapidly, for example, jumping from a Category 1 to a Category 3 storm in just hours.
Growing evidence shows this is true of other ocean basins.
Hurricane Milton needed only one day in the Gulf of Mexico in October to go from tropical storm to the Gulf's second-most powerful hurricane on record, slamming Florida's west coast.
Warmer air can also hold more moisture, helping storms carry and eventually release more rain. As a result, hurricanes are delivering flooding even in mountain towns such as Asheville, North Carolina, inundated in September by Hurricane Helene.
VOLCANIC SURGE
Scientists fear climate change could boost volcanic eruptions.
In Iceland, volcanoes appear to be responding to rapid glacier retreat. As ice melts, less pressure is exerted on the Earth's crust and mantle.
Volcanologists worry this could destabilise magma reservoirs and appears to be leading to more magma being created, building up pressure underground.
About 245 volcanoes around the world lie under or near ice and could be at risk.
OCEAN SLOWDOWN
The warming of the Atlantic could hasten the collapse of a key current system, which scientists warn could already be sputtering.
The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), which transports warm water from the tropics to the North Atlantic, has helped to keep European winters milder for centuries.
Research in 2018 showed that AMOC has weakened by about 15% since 1950, while research published in February in the journal Science Advances suggested it could be closer to a critical slowdown than previously thought.
https://www.timeslive.co.za/news/sci-tech/2024-11-12-explainer-cop29-what-is-the-latest-science-on-climate-change/#google_vignette


Times live 2
Action against climate change should not compromise development, says Ramaphosa
26 September 2023 - 13:21
President Cyril Ramaphosa believes no country should be forced to choose between climate change action and meeting its developmental aspirations.
To achieve the sustainable development goals by 2030, the president said unity of purpose and action between countries is vital, as is a common commitment to multilateralism in the global climate change effort.
In his weekly newsletter he affirmed the country's firm commitment to contributing its fair share to the global climate change effort.
“The message we took to this year’s UN General Assembly is that the unique circumstances of countries with low levels of development must be taken into account and developed economy countries must honour their commitments to support climate mitigation and adaptation.”
The president said the recent catastrophic floods in Libya are a stark reminder of the extreme vulnerability of developing economy countries to the effects of an ever-changing climate, citing that many other countries on the African continent are equally vulnerable.
“Despite carrying the least responsibility for global warming, Africa is warming faster than the rest of the world. I have just returned from the UN General Assembly in New York where climate change was a major focus of discussion.”
Ramaphosa pointed to a growing concern that the international community is falling significantly short on meeting the goals contained in the Paris Agreement to combat climate change. 
“While the nations of the world agreed in Paris in 2015 on urgent actions to limit global temperature rises and mitigate the impact of climate change, the effects of climate change are being increasingly felt with greater ferocity.”
Though developed economy countries promised to support developing economies as they transition to low-carbon and climate-resilient societies, the president said this support has not been forthcoming at the scale and with the urgency needed.
“Among other things, wealthy countries have not provided the promised finance vulnerable countries need to adapt to climate change and to cover the cost of the loss and damage caused by climate disasters.”
Africa’s people are literally paying the price for the industrialisation and development of the countries of the north
President Cyril Ramaphosa 
The president reflected on the recently convened climate ambition summit on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly to galvanise governments, business, financial institutions and civil society towards greater climate action.
“By emphasising ‘ambition’, UN secretary-general António Guterres was saying not nearly enough is being done to tackle climate change and there is insufficient urgency.
“South Africa used the summit to reiterate our long-stated position that developed economy countries must fulfil their obligations and honour their past promises to developing economy countries.”
Ramaphosa said it was not about charity but economic and social justice.
“Africa’s people are literally paying the price for the industrialisation and development of the countries of the north. It is also about shared interests because the economic and social havoc caused by climate change will make the world more unstable and less secure and will increase competition for scarce resources like water and food.”
The president said African countries cannot be bystanders to their own development.
“We are putting the necessary measures in place to decarbonise our respective economies while pursuing sustainable development. The transformation of the energy landscape in Africa is a priority. As African countries we have called on the international community to support efforts to increase the continent’s renewable energy capacity while ensuring energy security for Africa’s people.”
Ramaphosa said this needs to take place alongside increased investment in smart, digital and efficient green technologies in carbon-intensive sectors such as transportation, industry and electricity.
“As South Africa we want to use our abundant solar and wind resources to position our country at the forefront of the clean energy transition. Regulatory reforms undertaken by this administration have resulted in a confirmed pipeline of renewable energy projects that are expected to produce in excess of 10 gigawatts of electricity.”
The president said government has reaffirmed that the transition to low-carbon economies and societies must be just and inclusive and must also be appropriate to national circumstances and development plans.
“As the world works to address climate change we need to avoid measures that, while intended to reduce global warming, simply further increase the vulnerability of developing economies.
'One of these measures is the EU's carbon border adjustment mechanism which will increase tariffs on all imports into the EU that are produced through carbon-intensive processes.”
According to Ramaphosa this is likely to have a significant impact on South African producers, increase the costs of South African exports into European markets and reduce our economy’s competitiveness. 
“Trade mechanisms must enable products from Africa to compete on fair and equitable terms. Trade tariffs and non-trade barriers that have an environmental purpose should be the product of multilateral agreements.”








timeslive.co.za/politics/2023-09-26-action-against-climate-change-should-not-compromise-development-says-ramaphosa/?


Times live 3
Mantashe slams NGOs ‘weaponising climate change against development’
17 October 2023 - 16:22
Minister of mineral resources & energy Gwede Mantashe says the energy transition and causes of climate change are being “weaponised” against development on the African continent through its natural fossil-fuel endowments. 
“The recent sizeable discoveries of oil in Namibia and Côte d'Ivoire and gas in South Africa are proving to be a game-changer and have intensified the need to step up exploration campaigns on the African continent. This is an opportunity for Africa to benefit from its endowment of these natural resources, as it is with critical minerals,” said Mantashe. 
In South Africa we suffer from something called load-shedding. It is not because we do not have enough coal or enough plants.  We have that. It is because we do not have transmission capacity
Gwede Mantashe, mineral resources and energy minister 
“A binding constraint to Africa’s increased oil and gas exploration programme this conference must help us find solutions to is the weaponisation of climate change against development, at the centre of which are foreign funded non-governmental organisations (NGOs).” 
Mantashe was speaking at African Energy Week in Cape Town on Tuesday morning.
The event was attended by delegates from global energy companies and government officials from across Africa. 
Mantashe said South Africa and the African continent needed to have “the correct approach” to the energy transition. He said South Africa needed to strengthen its energy baseload as it partnered with producers of renewable energy. 
“In South Africa we suffer from something called load-shedding. It is not because we do not have enough coal or enough plants. We have that. It is because we do not have transmission capacity,” Mantashe said. 
Executive chair of the African Energy Chamber NJ Ayuk said Africa was being told to stop extracting coal, oil and other fuels and move to clean energy despite new discoveries in South Africa, Namibia and Nigeria which indicate  the continent has a chance to drive energy investment on its own terms. 
“From frontier exploration, countries like Namibia that were known as frontiers are no longer frontiers. They are hotspots. But also in countries like Senegal we see people saying don’t leave it in the ground,” he said. 
Ayuk said while proposals to move to clean energy were valid, Africa had a more urgent need to feed, power and sustain its economies than developed economies.
“We also have to be very truthful to ourselves. We have to listen to what young people are telling us this morning. Drill, baby, drill. You cannot produce gas if you don’t drill. We have to do that. 
“It shouldn’t take too long to produce a project by the time you need to sign it. Sign, baby, sign. We need to create an enabling environment for energy investment. Our industry has not been the best to 52% of Africa. Women continue to be the last hired and first fired in our sector,” Ayuk said. 
timeslive.co.za/news/south-africa/2023-10-17-mantashe-slams-ngos-weaponising-climate-change-against-development/?


Times live 4
Facing ‘horrific’ Pacific level rise, Tuvalu crafts climate survival plan
Fearing “horrific” risks from a rising ocean that could swamp low-lying islands, the Pacific nation of Tuvalu aims to reinforce its coasts in a novel partnership with Australia aimed at helping the developing island state adapt to climate change.
The project will test a new UN blueprint under which one rich nation takes responsibility for raising funds to enable a climate-vulnerable country to roll out measures to cope better with heatwaves, floods, storms, droughts and rising seas.
Tom Mitchell, executive director of the International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), said the plans marked a “fresh look at adaptation” after years of underfunded policies with no clear steer from governments.
Tuvalu, a chain of nine atolls midway between Australia and Hawaii, has a highest point of only about 4.5m and is among the countries most at risk from rising sea levels as global warming melts ice from Greenland to Antarctica.
Announcing the adaptation plan, Tuvalu finance minister Seve Paeniu told a UN Climate Ambition Summit in New York on Wednesday there were “horrific” possibilities sea levels could rise by up to 2m this century as the planet heats up.
“The habitable land of Tuvalu is already succumbing to sea level rise,” he said, adding that 40% of the main island, site of the capital Funafuti, is already underwater during king tides.
It estimates adaptation needs — everything from drought-resistant crops to hurricane warning systems — will be $160bn to $340bn (about R3-trillion to R6.4-trillion) a year by 2030 and $315bn to $560bn (about R6-trillion to R10.5-trillion) by 2050.
UN climate talks in 2021 urged wealthy countries to at least double their collective provision of adaptation finance by 2025, which would amount to about $40bn (about R755bn) per year.
“Not enough is being done. There is an adaptation finance gap and it is widening,” said Siri Eriksen, professor of climate and development at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences.
“A general problem is that most adaptation finance so far has been public or multilateral, and it's not been enough,” she said, adding “there needs to be ways to get more private finance into adaptation”.
She also emphasised there are often limits to how far countries and communities can adapt to rising oceans. For example, it will be too costly to build ever-higher sea walls.
“There is a danger of a false sense of security and entrenching people into settlements and livelihoods,” she warned.
“Even with mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, sea level rise will continue beyond 2100.”
https://www.timeslive.co.za/news/world/2023-09-22-facing-horrific-pacific-level-rise-tuvalu-crafts-climate-survival-plan/


Independent online 1
Climate change is moving faster
Climate change is moving much faster than we are, pushing ecosystems and communities to their limits, according to new research. We will miss the opportunity to limit warming to 1.5ºC this century with minimum overshoot if people fail to change course by speeding the transition away from fossil fuels and establishing low carbon, climate resilient economies.
Already, 3.3 billion to 3.6 billion people are vulnerable to the effects of climate change, and this number will rapidly rise as temperatures rise. We urgently need to ramp up efforts to assist people and nature in adapting to a warming world and implementing climate solutions. The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change’s (UNFCCC) main decision-making body is the COP (Conference of the Parties). It includes delegates from all countries that have signed up to the UNFCCC (or “parties”). The COP evaluates the effectiveness of measures implemented by parties to prevent climate change against the overall goal of the UNFCCC and is held once a year. COP28 must be the time when the world comes together to address the climate crisis and deliver for people and nature.
Climate change continues to be the world’s most serious “existential challenge”. We are already seeing the effects of the climate crisis, as proven by the “Durban rain bomb” of April 2022 in KwaZulu-Natal. Climate change has killed dozens, displaced thousands, and left millions of people food insecure. Climate change, resource-induced wars, and environmental disasters continue unabated throughout South Africa and around the world, affecting hundreds of thousands of families in 2023 alone. Evidence is growing that gas extraction in South Africa will not provide long-term economic benefits to the country. In fact, the current intentions are directly aligned with long-term plans of huge energy corporations to remove Russian energy giants as main European energy suppliers. These corporations are proposing 195 massive oil and gas projects known as “carbon bombs”, including several in Africa, that will push the planet beyond internationally agreed-upon temperature boundaries. Pollution knows no borders; increases in one country affect us all. We must make the transition to renewable energy. Renewable and free energy solutions that are decentralised and led by communities are less expensive and safer, with additional environmental and social benefits. The relentless promotion of “green” hydrogen is a risky and polluting distraction, especially when it is sourced from natural gas and other fossil fuels. Massive investments and infrastructure, partially sponsored by our own governments, are aimed at serving the Global North, with little to no benefit from greater energy access in our own territory.
As COP28 brings focus to South Africa and its vulnerabilities, governments are finally acknowledging the “just transition” narrative (after years of community struggles and articulations). Nonetheless, we are witnessing a stronger drive by industry to further cement filthy energy colonialism. The growing interest in filthy energy resources throughout the region contradicts the agreements made at COP27. Expansion of fossil fuel operations in South Africa, exploration of oil and gas in Zimbabwe and Ivory Coast, exploitation of offshore oil and gas reserves in Nigeria, gas operations in Mozambique and interests in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and resuscitation of coal use in Europe to fill the void left by the war in Ukraine are just a few examples of the lip service paid to reducing reliance on dirty fossil fuel. False solutions such as chemical recycling, plastic/waste incineration, carbon markets, carbon offsetting, geo-engineering, net zero, and so on in various African countries funded by the Global North are pushing us deeper into the climate emergency and vulnerable communities on the front lines with no means of defence to the devastating effects of climate change.
COP28
COP28 is being held in the United Arab Emirates. The summit will be held at Expo City Dubai from November 30 until December 12. People all over the world are failing to have any expectation from COP, as it seems there are little to no changes in the current global warming and climate change struggle. At this year’s COP28, we should expect the following:
– Climate financing should be raised to fulfil the aim, but only as grants, with no debt-creating or repressive restrictions.
– Clear commitments: there is a need to ensure that the historical “polluter-pays” duties for the “climate debt” owed by huge polluters are respected and paid, as well as the rest of the Global South based on how the climate issue affects them. The Global North must properly and justly compensate for the loss and harm suffered by those who are most vulnerable and often least accountable for environmental destruction.
– Build just food systems for food sovereignty: recognise, appreciate, and promote peasant agro-ecology and other genuine sustainable food production and distribution models based on food sovereignty as viable alternatives to the industrialised food system. Local level initiatives by women and peasants should develop food systems and food sovereignty, and they must be backed unconditionally by national and international resources. Governments should improve agricultural budget allocations and protect indigenous seeds and seed systems.
– Stop financing false solutions: abandon all false solutions (including net zero, failed emissions-trading and offsetting mechanisms such as clean development mechanisms (CDMs), so-called nature-based and other techno-fix solutions such as geo-engineering, monoculture sequestration, and dangerous genetic modification and manipulation.
– Leave fossil fuels underground: all new exploration must be halted by governments of the Global North and Global South, as well as financiers of the global oil, gas, and coal companies. Our governments must devote existing reserves to a sovereignty agenda of fossil fuel phase-out and commit to a just energy transition.
– Transforming our energy system: energy sufficiency for all, energy sovereignty, energy democracy, free energy technologies, energy as a common good, 100% renewable energy for all, community-owned renewable energy, and low-impact renewable energy are all ideas that can help us urgently transition as a society to a more just and environmentally friendly way of life.
– Build peace and bring an end to climate hypocrisy: war is profitable (for a few). The current surge in global desire for African energy reserves is embedded in a worldwide war for power over energy supplies to Europe, with oil and gas multinational firms wanting to further devastate our habitats while reaping massive profits from the industry.
– Stop waste colonialism: the Global North must stop dumping waste in the Global South, and all parties must agree to excluding waste-to-energy incineration from national and other climate initiatives.
– Respect and uphold the rights of people: revise national legal frameworks to better account for the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities, and especially to increase women’s rights and protection from violence.
Kershni Ramreddi is a Just and Energy Project Officer at the South Durban Community Environmental Alliance.
iol.co.za/news/politics/opinion/climate-change-is-moving-faster-d0a0934e-351d-4051-9e0b-c2377f3566b9?


Independent online 2
Climate change exacerbating South Africa’s triple challenges
outh Africa is one of the most unequal countries in the world; the divide between the rich and the poor is larger than ever. Currently, the unemployment rate, at more than 35%, is at a record level.
Climate change exacerbates our triple challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality.
South Africa is in a part of the world that is severely affected by climate variability. The country frequently experiences drought, flooding and other extreme weather events, with evidence that the frequency and intensity of such events is increasing because of climate change.
Addressing climate change means strengthening adaptation measures to improve the resilience to immediate events (eg extreme weather disasters) as well as long-term climatic shifts that affect water security, food security and human health with a particular focus on vulnerable groups, particularly rural communities, the poor, women, the youth and children.
Tackling climate change will require urgent, significant and transformational changes across all sectors of the economy.
It will require innovations in urban and infrastructure planning, a massive shift to clean energy sources, and changes to how we use our land and water and obtain our food.
The years ahead will be marked by steadily increasing global mean temperatures, with associated physical impacts, alongside the increasing urgency of the global mitigation response.
In the next few years, the global energy transition will accelerate, with increasing pressure on disinvestment in fossil fuels.
A just transition aims to achieve a quality life for all South Africans, in the context of increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate, fostering climate resilience and reaching net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, in line with the best available science.
A just transition builds the resilience of the economy and people through affordable, decentralised, diversely owned renewable energy systems, the conservation of natural resources, equitable access to water resources, an environment that is not harmful to one’s health and wellbeing, and sustainable, equitable, inclusive land use for all, especially for the most vulnerable.
The coal value chain in South Africa faces one of the earliest disruptions in the global transition towards reaching net-zero emissions.
Demand for coal for electricity and exports shrank in the 2010s and is expected to decline further in the long term as countries reduce their greenhouse gas emissions – the current driver for coal demand is not sustainable. This will create significant risks in South Africa, including revenue loss from reduced coal exports; job losses across the coal value chain; and loss of the economic ecosystems around coal mining communities, potentially creating ghost towns without effective economic diversification.
The changes will be difficult for some, particularly the workers and communities whose lives and livelihoods are tied to fossil fuel industries, as well as women, youth and the poor, who are already disproportionately bearing the brunt of South Africa’s hardships and triple challenges.
Coal production requires a significant amount of water and climate change is likely to increase water scarcity and competition throughout the south. Mining operations for coal and other products are also vulnerable to increased temperatures and extreme weather events.
With appropriate planning and support, some of the job losses in the coal value chain can be offset by further development of the domestic renewable energy manufacturing industry.
As the transition accelerates in the period 2025-2030, very rapid investment will require new transmission lines and technologies for power generation and storage.
More reliable and cheaper electricity will promote a more sustainable economy and job creation, while there will be growing international and domestic markets for e-vehicles and other technologies to reduce emissions and improve resilience, which investments will seek to diversify economies in coal-dependent communities; and there is the prospect of greater urban densification that reduces commuter and labour costs and increases housing demand, thus creating new economies.
Beyond 2030, there will be a more affordable and reliable electricity system and other innovative investments, which lays the basis for a more dynamic, diversified and equitable economy.
It is in South Africa’s national interests to join the world in combating climate change, in accordance with national circumstances and development priorities.
This is not only an environmental imperative, but an economic one, too, as countries around the world start to shift toward low-emissions policies, affecting global trade as well as demand for goods and resources.
iol.co.za/pretoria-news/opinion/climate-change-exacerbating-south-africas-triple-challenges-682315df-6cba-44db-b255-c134d852de50?


Independent online 3
Africa needs finance to go green
From sunshine to rare minerals to a youthful population, Africa has the raw ingredients to make the green transition. Now it needs the finance.
Take power. Exceptionally strong sun and vast swaths of desert mean Africa is the region with the highest solar generation potential over the long term, according to calculations by the World Bank. It's now cheaper to build and operate new large-scale wind and solar farms in many parts of the world than to keep running coal or gas-fired power plants. With more than half of people in sub-Saharan Africa living without electricity, expanding solar should be a no-brainer.
Yet investment in renewable energy in Africa fell to an 11-year low in 2021, comprising just 0.6% of the global total, according to a report by BloombergNEF. Financing options are insufficient and expensive because lenders worry about the risks of taking on new projects in often politically or economically unstable countries with broken supply chains - though the opportunities can be unrivaled.
"African cities and economies are growing faster than anywhere in the world, so it's ripe for transformation. The question is why we are not seeing the uptick in investment we should expect," said Wanjira Mathai, regional director for Africa at the World Resources Institute. "The biggest challenge right now is the cost of capital. To unlock that would be absolutely catalytic."
The world's least developed continent, Africa produces just 4% of global greenhouse gas emissions but is already suffering some of the worst consequences of a changing climate. Rich nations have never met a 2009 pledge to funnel $100 billion a year to help developing countries shift toward cleaner energy sources and bolster their infrastructure against extreme weather.
At the U.N.-sponsored COP27 climate talks in Egypt last year, delegates agreed to create a new fund for countries battered by climate disasters, though the details have yet to be hammered out.
And private sector lenders are calling for multilateral development banks to play a bigger role in financing clean energy projects in poorer nations.It's an issue that looms large over this year's climate conference, which is taking place in Dubai.
Africa needs investments worth $2.3 trillion to meet the needs of its population, plus an additional $1 trillion to bolster its infrastructure against climate disasters, according to estimates from the Africa Finance Corp.
Financing for climate-related projects around the world reached an estimated $632 billion in 2019 and 2020, according to the Global Climate Initiative. Only $19 billion of that came to Africa, including just $2 billion from the private sector.Even the continent's buzzing start-up scene lags behind the rest of the world. Africa was on the receiving end of just over 1% of the $415 billion in venture capital that went into the start-up sector globally in 2022, according to research firm Briter Bridges. Of that, 15%, or around $800 million went into "clean tech" or "climate tech."
Faced with limited resources and immediate challenges, governments are making stark - and divergent - choices.
"Two days ago, we went to distribute food relief to 4.3 million affected Kenyans in an emergency program that has forced us to reallocate funds budgeted for education and health," Kenya's newly-elected president, William Ruto, told COP27 leaders in November. "The trade-offs we are forced to make between indispensable public goods is evidence that climate change is directly threatening our people's life, health and future."
Ruto called for Africa to leapfrog fossil fuels and embrace clean power as the foundation of its future development. Lacking the oil, gas and coal deposits abundant in some parts of the continent, Kenya has embraced renewables instead. Over 90% of its power comes from sources including solar, wind and geothermal. It also beat the European Union by four years in banning single-use plastic bags and is now considering forcing drivers to pay a congestion charge to curb pollution, a measure that only London has enacted and that New York is debating.
But Kenya's an exception. Countries like Nigeria, Senegal and Mozambique are planning to increase oil and gas production, taking advantage of prices buoyed by Russia's invasion of Ukraine almost a year ago. If the industrialized countries, which prospered for two centuries at the expense of the planet, want them to curb those plans - or avoid drilling in pristine rainforests - they will have to pay.
"They ban coal, and we follow, they say firewood is not for fetching, they say we need to plant more trees," Bola Tinubu, a leading candidate in this month's Nigerian presidential elections, said in October. "If you don't guarantee our finances and work with us to stop this, we are not going to comply with your climate change."
The Just Energy Transition Partnerships are an effort to respond. The first was signed in 2021 between South Africa and the U.S., the U.K., the European Union, Germany and France. The $8.5 billion financing package was designed to help South Africa transition away from coal and provide a blueprint for new agreements between developed countries and middle-income nations that depend on dirtier fossil fuels.
The details of the deal weren't agreed until a few months ago though, with South Africa and its partners disagreeing about how the money should be spent. In the meantime, South Africans have faced daily power rationing as the loss-making state utility Eskom struggles to manage its aging coal-fired plants.
The African Hydrogen Partnership, a grouping of private sector organizations, is pushing to develop green hydrogen as an alternative fro everything from public transport to clean cooking fuel.
"Our focus is on the domestic market," said its co-founder and vice-chairman Siegfried Huegemann. "It's where we see great potential, fantastic potential for developing new industries."
When pipelines and harbors are built, however, Africa could become a major source of green hydrogen for markets elsewhere. The continent has the potential to produce €1 trillion ($1.1 trillion) worth of green hydrogen annually by 2035, according to a study by the European Investment Bank. As with electricity generation, however, transformational changes of that magnitude need money.
"We know that the climate challenge will be significantly difficult to manage and to adapt to - and in Africa the opportunity is dependent upon building resilience and economic resilience above all," Mathai said. "You can see what a vicious circle this is."
iol.co.za/business-report/energy/africa-needs-finance-to-go-green-5ca4ac23-41c8-4947-b69a-de400331d275?


Le figargo 1 France 
Race for innovation to combat global warming
By  Guillaume Guichard
ANALYSIS - Half of the technologies needed to make the global economy carbon neutral in 30 years are not yet ready. Experts are sounding the alarm.
At the beginning of August, IPCC scientists once again warned of the worrying global warming and the urgent need to act to counter it. At the end of last week, an American laboratory succeeded for the first time, thanks to nuclear fusion, in producing more energy than their experiment consumed. However, this technology is not expected to lead to a commercial reactor before the second half of the century.
This is how research and innovation go, not always in step with human concerns. While fusion is at the basic research stage, half of the decarbonized technologies needed to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 are only at the prototype or demonstrator stage. This is one of the worrying conclusions, which went relatively unnoticed, of the "Net Zero" report by the International Energy Agency (IEA) published in the spring. This proportion is even higher in heavy industry. "Without a major acceleration in innovation in favor of decarbonized energies, it will not be possible to achieve net zero CO2 emissions by 2050 ," warns the IEA. We must start immediately, urges the agency: "A major innovation effort is needed by 2030 to bring these solutions to market."
We are not there yet
Researchers, start-ups and R&D departments of large companies are engaged in a race against time. In just three decades, it is necessary to develop and make profitable the production of CO2-neutral electricity and the electrification of sectors heavily dependent on fossil fuels. All this while generating energy savings - 30% of the reduction in CO2 emissions will come from reduced consumption, the IEA aims for. "We have to make a technological revolution, and this cannot be decreed by setting an expiry date for the old world, but at the pace of research and innovation ," warned Marc Fontecave, professor of chemistry at the Collège de France, during a conference in 2019. " We are moving forward, but we are not there yet. There is no simple solution to the problems we have to solve."
Three technologies alone, if developed in time, could eliminate no less than 15% of human CO2 emissions: high-energy density batteries, hydrogen electrolysers and carbon capture directly from the atmosphere. This trio would make it possible to reduce emissions from sectors that are very difficult to depollute, such as heavy industry and long-distance transport. But we are not there yet.
Today, lithium-ion batteries, for example, do not have the qualities needed to make an airplane fly. Electrolyzers to produce hydrogen from electricity are much less efficient, and therefore much more expensive than those currently used in refineries and run on fossil fuels. As for carbon capture, it is still very expensive.
Increasingly advanced research
Time is running out and innovation is venturing into increasingly arid lands. “According to the latest studies, it takes eight to ten years to go from the idea (the publication of a research paper) to the first patent, in the field of decarbonized energies ,” explains Greg De Temmerman, physicist and director of the think-tank Zenon Research. And for good reason, this field calls for increasingly sophisticated technologies.” To achieve net zero carbon emissions by mid-century, the IEA estimates that the time between the first prototype and market launch must be shortened by 20%.
Once developed, innovations still need to successfully enter the market and be competitive. It took a quarter of a century for solar panels to reach 1% market share in one country (Spain), but only six years for lithium-ion batteries in the automobile industry. In industry, it will be more complicated: large equipment has very long lifespans and will not be quickly replaceable. Out of ten steel plants in operation today, an average of four will still be running in 2050. This is too many to meet climate objectives. The other solution, developed in parallel with disruptive innovations, consists of constantly improving existing products. Every three years or so, a new generation of solar panels arrives on the market, with better energy yields.
How to accelerate the diffusion of innovations? Economists point to the usual trio of tools. The carbon tax, to increase the cost of industrial processes based on fossil energy. Regulation, to impose anti-pollution standards. And subsidies, to give impetus to the marketing of green solutions. "We are at a moment of very significant acceleration ," says François Legalland, director of Liten, at the CEA. One of the crucial subjects to achieve this is financing, and thanks in particular to the French and European recovery plans, this has never been so high."
The European Union has in fact planned to deploy an innovation fund of 30 billion euros by 2030. But, the IEA estimates, 90 billion dollars would have to be invested, at a global level, on the sole stage of prototypes of new technologies to sufficiently accelerate innovation... The race against time has begun.
lefigaro.fr/societes/course-a-l-innovation-pour-lutter-contre-le-rechauffement-climatique-20210822?


Le figargo 2
Terrible drought in Horn of Africa blamed on global warming
By  Marc Cherki
Published April 27, 2023 at 7:34 p.m., updatedApril 27, 2023 at 8:14 p.m.
Without climate change, famine would not have plagued the region for more than two consecutive years.
Without global warming, caused by greenhouse gas emissions since the beginning of the industrial era, the terrible drought that has been raging since the end of 2020 in the Horn of Africa (which stretches from Somalia to Sudan, via Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Djibouti) would not have happened. Nothing less.
This is the conclusion announced on April 27 by researchers grouped within WWA (World Weather Attribution), a group of universities that has been cooperating since 2015 to rapidly assess whether extreme weather events are caused or not by climate change. According to them, precipitation has had a weak beneficial effect on agricultural crops, livestock and access to water for populations because of the record temperatures observed.
Emergency aid requested
This situation would not occur in a world where the global average temperature was 1.2°C lower, the level of current warming. Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia have suffered their worst droughts in nearly 60 years. At least since 1964, WWA scientists note; before that year, data on agricultural crops were patchy. So it is not possible to go back further.
This latest drought in eastern Africa began with lower than average rainfall during the short rains season from October to December 2020. This lack of rainfall continued for the next two years.
Despite recent rains in Kenya since March, the UN High Council for Refugees is anticipating a relatively mild sixth rainy season. And the 19 researchers (from South Africa, Germany, the United States, Great Britain, Kenya, Mozambique and the Netherlands) who co-signed the WWA paper do not expect famines to ease before mid-2023. Emergency aid is being called for by the UN for 3.3 million people in Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia alone.
A cautious assessment
"A conservative estimate is that a drought of this intensity and duration has a 1 in 100 chance of occurring" under current climate change, the scientists note in their detailed report published on a registry at Imperial College London . This assessment is conservative because "current climate models underestimate the temperature increase that we are seeing," says Friederike Otto, co-author of the article and a researcher at the Grantham Institute at Imperial College.
The increase in temperature measured in the Horn of Africa has had the greatest impact, causing evapotranspiration of the land, drying out of crops and lower availability of water for livestock and populations. On the other hand, the relative weakness of tropical rains in the autumn seems more linked to the recurring climatic phenomenon, La Niña, which lasted three years and is not attributable to global warming.
Other extreme phenomena
Soil drying can occur in conjunction with other extreme events, such as heavier, intense rainfall leading to more frequent flooding. In November 2022, WWA estimated that flooding in West Africa in late spring 2022, particularly in Nigeria and Niger, was 80 times more likely to occur due to climate change.
Faced with these marked changes, scientists are urging African countries to adapt. They recommend "crop diversification, poverty reduction through social security systems and other sources of income, and of course, conflict reduction" such as those affecting Sudan and Somalia.
https://www.lefigaro.fr/sciences/la-terrible-secheresse-dans-la-corne-de-l-afrique-attribuee-au-rechauffement-climatique-20230427?




Le figargo 3
It has never been as hot as July on Earth
By  Anne-Laure Frémont
Published July 27, 2023 at 3:30 p.m., updatedAugust 8, 2023 at 10:04 a.m.
On land and at sea, last month was the warmest on record since observations began in the 19th century .
The average global temperature of the planet reached 16.9 degrees in July. This is much higher than the 16.6 degrees recorded in July 2019, the month that previously held the record for heat. July 2023 has therefore largely broken the record for the hottest month ever recorded on Earth, with 0.33°C more than July 2019, according to Copernicus.
Last month, marked by heatwaves and wildfires across the world, also saw air temperatures 0.72°C warmer than the recent average (1991-2020) for July alone. Over the first seven months of the year, 2023 so far ranks as the third warmest year on record.
The suspense was limited: as early as July 27, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the European Copernicus Observatory had announced that July 2023 would indeed be the hottest July ever recorded. It is even on track to become the hottest of all months since observations began in the mid-19th century .
" We would have to go back perhaps thousands, even tens of thousands of years to find similar conditions on our planet , " suggests Dr Karsten Haustein, a climatologist at the University of Leipzig... while admitting that paleoclimatic data are obviously not precise enough to affirm this.
"Make way for the era of global turmoil  "
" The era of global warming is over, and now it's time for the era of global boiling, " UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said on Thursday. Climate change is an " existential threat ," declared US President Joe Biden. In light of the temperature curves and the record readings piling up in the Northern Hemisphere - on land and at sea - the conclusion is clear: " We are beyond anything we have ever experienced, in a territory of absolutely unprecedented records , " confirmed Karsten Haustein during a press briefing.
After an already extraordinary June,  the world experienced its hottest day (17.08 °C) on July 6. In China, the national temperature record was broken in Turpan (Xinjiang) on ​​July 16, with 52.2 °C. In the United States, in Death Valley, California, it was over 48.9 °C at night, while off the coast of Florida the water exceeded 38 °C on Monday night. Again, potential records.
49°C in Tunis, 48.7°C in Algiers, 48.2°C in Jerzu in Sardinia… The Mediterranean basin is also suffocating. On Monday, its waters reached an unprecedented temperature of 28.71°C. At the same time, fires fanned by heat, drought and wind are ravaging the region. They have caused at least 34 deaths in Algeria and continue to engulf the Greek islands of Rhodes, Corfu and Euboea.
 Emissions, the “main driver” of this warming
These extremes come as the natural and recurring climate phenomenon El Niño has just made its return . This warm anomaly in the equatorial Pacific waters, which tends to warm global temperatures, will gradually increase in strength until the end of the year. " It is therefore unlikely that the July record will remain isolated this year , " predicts Carlo Buontempo, director of the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S), in a press release. However, El Niño only amplifies the rise in temperatures in a world that is already 1.2°C warmer than it was in the past: " Human greenhouse gas emissions remain the main driver of this rise , " he points out.
Also read:  Current heatwaves and droughts, “direct consequences of global warming” 
This week, the World Weather Attribution network of scientists  (which assesses the link between extreme events and climate change) estimated that the recent heatwaves would have been " virtually impossible " in a world without global warming. With it, heatwaves in Europe are 2.5°C hotter and the one experienced in China " at least 50 times more likely " .
Rangers pose in front of a digital display of an unofficial heat reading at the Furnace Creek Visitor Center in Death Valley National Park in Death Valley, California, July 16, 2023. RONDA CHURCHILL / AFP
The Copernicus agency also notes that during the first and third weeks of the month, the global average temperature temporarily exceeded the threshold of 1.5 °C above the pre-industrial level (in other words before the planet was warmed by the burning of coal, oil and gas). " This does not mean that we have reached or exceeded the objective of the Paris agreement " aimed at limiting warming to + 1.5 °C, however, reminds the British climatologist Friederike Otto. Because this agreement sealed at COP21 implies long-term warming, over many years. But " if we continue on the current trajectory, (…) we will reach 1.5 °C by the beginning of the 2030s " , warns Karsten Haustein.
Also read:  The surface of seas and oceans is overheating 
This climate change threatens the foundations of our health systems, says Marina Romanello, executive director of The Lancet Countdown project. Heat-related mortality increased by 68% between 2017 and 2021 compared to the early 2000s, with more than 60,000 deaths recorded in Europe last summer alone. It also threatens our economies: “ In 2021, 470 billion working hours were lost , ” particularly in the most exposed sectors, such as agriculture and construction.
Many scientists are calling for the adoption of international legislation on the phase-out of fossil fuels at the next climate conference (COP28), which is being held in Dubai in December. This is still a long way off: on Thursday, the International Energy Agency announced that global coal consumption had reached a record high in 2022.
https://www.lefigaro.fr/sciences/on-est-au-dela-de-tout-ce-qu-on-a-deja-connu-le-mois-de-juillet-bat-tous-les-records-de-temperatures-20230727?


Le figargo 4
Small, fragile, aging... The great vulnerability of Pyrenees ski resorts in the face of global warming.
 The Occitanie Regional Audit Office has highlighted the insufficient diversification of activities in the mountain resorts, which are threatened by the lack of snow.
Faced with global warming, the diversification of activities in Pyrenees ski resorts remains insufficient. This is highlighted by the latest survey by the Occitanie Regional Chamber of Auditors, which studied eight resorts (Grand Tourmalet, Font Romeu Pyrénées 2000, Ax 3 Domaines, etc.) as well as the Compagnie des Pyrénées (business of eight resorts) and the SPL Trio (three small resorts in the Pyrénées Orientales). The study is part of the national survey on the mountain by the Court of Auditors. The 38 ski resorts in the French Pyrenees recorded 4.85 million skier days in 2022, or 9% of national attendance, and nearly 100 million euros in ski lift revenue.
But many are fragile, because of their small size which does not allow them to renew ski lifts with an average age of 30 years. "The resorts are all loss-making, if we count the public aid to support investments, notes Hervé Bournoville, general rapporteur of the Regional Chamber of Auditors. Public aid represents 25% of turnover. "
Aging habitat
They also suffer from aging housing - half of the housing is classified in the F or G categories of thermal sieves - and a high rate of second homes. In addition, skiing activity has decreased by 10% in France since the peak in 2008. Skiers are aging and renewing themselves less. "The activity has stalled with fewer skiers and an unsuitable housing stock; global warming is accentuating these trends ," summarizes Valérie Renet, president of the Regional Chamber of Accounts of Occitanie.
Snow is becoming rarer in the Pyrenees, especially this year. The snow outlook from INRAE ​​(National Institute for Agricultural, Food and Environmental Research) and Météo France according to the IPCC warming scenarios predict that the reliable altitude of snow will rise from 2000 to 2300 meters in 2050 in the Pyrenees, and from 1300 to 1800 meters in resorts producing artificial snow. On the Mediterranean side, the Pyrénées-Orientales are experiencing two consecutive years of drought.
"However, we are seeing a certain denial among ski resort managers," notes Valérie Renet. " For example, the Font Romeu Pyrénées 2000 resort in the Pyrénées-Orientales is planning a stable clientele for 25 years in its public service delegation contract." The Catalan resort has covered 93% of its ski area with snow cannons. This has enabled it to achieve "one of our three best seasons this winter with 420,000 skier days at the end of February" despite the drought, according to its director Jacques Alvarez. But the production of artificial snow will become difficult if the temperature continues to rise, forecasters point out.
Advantages of thermalism and hiking
Smaller resorts, such as Puyvalador in the Pyrénées-Orientales and Goulier in Ariège, admit that snow projections are not favourable. The climate risk exists everywhere on the chain but "is less marked in the Hautes-Pyrénées".
The diversification of resorts already exists, driven by thermalism, hiking and summer stays. Cauterets, Saint-Lary, Luchon, Ax-les-Thermes, Les Angles, Font-Romeu are village resorts that have kept an offer unrelated to skiing: thermal baths and fitness, hiking, cycling, sports, ice rink, shops. "The Pyrenees have an advantage: 62% of mountain visitors are in summer, compared to 38% in winter ," emphasizes Valérie Renet. The players most exposed to global warming will have to diversify their model towards four-season tourism." Faced with the limited resources of the resorts, "we have to make a decision ," adds Valérie Renet. We cannot continue to finance artificial snow and diversification.
Some resorts have started to create mountain bike trails with chairlifts adapted for bikes, mixed snowshoe and hiking trails, sledding and zip-lining activities. But this is still not enough and resorts only generate 5% of their revenue from ski lifts in the summer on average. The only exception is Cauterets, which reaches 50%. "Communities still consider diversification to be secondary compared to skiing ," laments Valérie Renet.
Regional aid
The public aid of 25 million euros per year allocated to Pyrenean resorts "could be used to finance adaptation measures" , recommends the chamber. However, this is not often the case. The Occitanie regional council has had a proactive policy, providing 44 million euros to resorts between 2018 and 2022, three-quarters of which in subsidies and one-quarter in capital. "The region has set itself the objective of not intervening in artificial snow, but it has helped finance snow equipment in the mountain plans of Cauterets, Saint-Lary, Ax-les-Thermes and the SPL Trio, so there is a paradox" , denounces Hervé Bournoville.
According to the magistrates, the aid is allocated " whatever the situation with regard to climate change, even if the sustainability of the station is not assured" . Finally, the chamber notes that the management of the stations remains too centred around the municipality, whereas in Spain, Andorra and Italy, groups are federating to avoid competition between activities.
https://www.lefigaro.fr/conjoncture/petites-fragiles-vieillissantes-la-grande-vulnerabilite-des-stations-de-ski-des-pyrenees-face-au-rechauffement-climatique-20240314?








Le Monde 1 France
Climate change: We must transform our country and ways of thinking
Editorial
Jérôme Fenoglio
Director of Le Monde
As part of the Adaption project, Le Monde is publishing a series of articles taking a deep dive into the current and near-term effects of climate change in France, in the hope of contributing to public debate.


You can share an article by clicking on the share icons at the top right of it.
The total or partial reproduction of an article, without the prior written authorization of Le Monde, is strictly forbidden.
For more information, see our Terms and Conditions.
For all authorization requests, contact syndication@lemonde.fr.


https://www.lemonde.fr/en/environment/article/2023/06/12/climate-change-we-must-transform-our-country-and-ways-of-thinking_6031001_114.html


Wherever we look in recent months, images, data and models point to global warming caused by human activity as the greatest peril of our time. "Extreme" has been the word of choice to describe the scale and severity of the damage, as well as the acceleration of the change our species is confronted with. With our way of life and the resources that enable it under threat, we are being faced with the contradictions of our consumer-driven economies.
In the hope of contributing to public debate, Le Monde will examine the current and near-term effects of climate change in France. Without diverting attention from the crucial need to act quickly to reduce greenhouse gas emissions causing global warming, the idea is to help explain that the grave situation already requires a series of changes and efforts that can grouped under the term "adaptation."
To illustrate this key notion, over 100 of our reporters have traveled across France in the early months of 2023. Just as the hot months of 2022 were marked by a series of climate disasters, this summer is already likely to see extreme heat, drought and more disruption. These phenomena are set to have a major, and largely predictable, impact across western Europe.
Read more Le Monde presents the Adaptation project
Our work will be published in 11 chapters over the next five weeks. We will inventory the climate disruption and what is being done to mitigate it across the country, in rural areas, urban centers, rivers, mountains, coastlines and forests. We will examine the ecosystems most affected and the regions most under threat from flooding, such as the French overseas territories, whose very existence is at stake in some cases. Our reporters also visited the Rhône river, which is so crucial to the country's energy grid; the southern Occitania region, where they observed the evolution of agriculture and the great transformation of our landscapes; and the ports of Brittany, a region that you might mistakenly think will be relatively unscathed.
No giving in to nostalgia
This collaborative work across all teams in the newsroom portrays a country that will never again be the one we once knew – aesthetically, culturally or economically. The identity of our regions will soon be turned upside down. Landscapes will be profoundly altered as a result of global warming, and agriculture in particular will be forced to evolve.
It will no longer be unusual to find clementines in Occitania or grapevines in Normandy. The dominant tree species in our forests will change, with the beech becoming rarer and the maritime pine gaining ground. Entire regions will need to rethink their economic identity. Many questions will be asked, such as whether Brittany should prepare for mass tourism as visitors spurn the south of the country and its scorching temperatures. Or whether more frequent droughts will require a rethink of river water distribution and how to fairly compensate the victims of this upheaval. The greatest unknown is the country's readiness to face up to such a reality, to predict the extremes and react fast.
Read the first chapter: How global warming is reshaping France's forests
Each of our reports has raised innumerable questions, most of which would justify public debates for which no framework exists today. The immediate consequences of global warming all require a serious and collective effort from all stakeholders. A mobilization beyond partisan divisions is possible.
Given the destruction of the familiar habitats and ecosystems with which we grew up, the risk is to indulge in nostalgia, or to oscillate between denial and fatalism. But the severity of the situation requires us to imagine how we can adapt, realistically, to the conditions we are about to face. We need to be able to imagine the worst in order to avoid it. We need resilient agricultural production, sensible water sharing and cities in which we can live despite the heat.
Policy choices
Fortunately, this immense project is not starting from scratch. Far from a uniformly pessimistic assessment, our deep dive reveals that parts of France were aware of the ongoing changes before last year's suffocating summer. Some stakeholders understood the magnitude of the projects needed to make the country livable under the scorching heat that is becoming the norm, in what used to be a temperate territory. Many have become aware of the catastrophe in progress and are already working to prepare for what's to come.
New
Le Monde’s app
Get the most out of your experience: download the app to enjoy Le Monde in English anywhere, anytime
Download
Well before 2022, the forestry sector noted and responded to the increasing summer wildfires and the profound changes in the species covering French woodlands. Mountain residents have long been calculating the number of years they can continue to harvest "white gold" and have also begun to adapt their activities accordingly, aiming to be less dependent on snow. The summer of 2022 primarily served as a gauge of political and media attention. Adaptation is already underway, albeit unevenly from one region and one sector to the next. For the time being, however, it is still to be untangled at the very level where it should be orchestrated: the state.
While the government cannot claim to have full jurisdiction over such a vast area affecting so many sectors, it does have an essential role to play in at least two respects.
First, it is responsible for charting a course that will prevent France from becoming maladapted, which will further exacerbate the problem. Not everything can be decided from the top, and local authorities are often ready to play their part.
Read more Subscribers only France adopts its first heat wave management plan
Yet policy choices can be complex. They require vision and courage, because country-wide planning also implies addressing the needs of local populations. The case of skiing in the Tarentaise Valley, to which one chapter of our project will be devoted, is a case in point: Should we pursue at all costs an activity that has shaped the region and provides a livelihood for hundreds of thousands of people, even as it over-exploits the environment, generates a staggering carbon footprint and ultimately contributes to the scarcity of snow and the melting of glaciers?
The second role of public authorities is to create the conditions for the fair financing of a transformation that will add hundreds of billions of euros to the already substantial cost of decarbonizing our economies over the coming decades. Adaptation to global warming and the mitigation of its causes both raise this same question and, for the time being, are hampered by similar opposition on the ground.
A sense for the common good
The government's outright refusal to accept the moderate proposals contained in the report by the economist Jean Pisani-Ferry and the general finance inspector Selma Mahfouz speaks volumes on this point, specifically about its views on public debt and the contribution of those who are wealthiest. Why does it persist in refusing to see the difference between the complacent unjustified borrowing from the past and borrowing in favor of strictly defined and essential investments for the next three decades? Why does it not take into account the urgency of the climate crisis, in the same way that Emmanuel Macron had decided to do "whatever it takes" in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic?
Regarding the equity of efforts, why does it continue to ignore what is obvious? The wealthiest people, through their lifestyle and consumption patterns, emit more greenhouse gases than those who live modestly. This is no longer a question of correcting disparities in income or wealth, but of elementary justice between human beings. Wealth should confer no right to deteriorate the conditions essential to the existence on earth of us all, including the air, the temperature and the relative stability of the environment. Whatever compensation mechanisms may need to be implemented, this obvious fact can no longer be ignored.
Read more Subscribers only How can France adapt to a +4°C warming?
It can also counter some people's doubts about the need for action in France, considering the sheer volume of worldwide emissions. The longtime responsibility of Western lifestyles for the degradation of the environment demands that we set an example. Depending on one's point of view, this conviction may amount to either climate universalism or acute national interest, seeing as the know-how developed today will contribute in large part to the value of our economy and influence in the future.
Clearly, adapting our country means adapting the way we see our relationship with life – our own species included – and with nature. Its success depends on our ability to stop being dragged down the two fatally slippery slopes of modernity – greed and cynicism – and instead to restore a sense for the long term and the common good. Such a movement for the peaceful rebuilding of our societies will inevitably require reflection and debate, to which Le Monde will continue to contribute over the coming months, beyond the articles we are publishing this summer.
ttps://www.lemonde.fr/en/environment/article/2023/06/12/climate-change-we-must-transform-our-country-and-ways-of-thinking_6031001_114.html




Le Monde 2
The UN is concerned about new records broken in 2021 by four key climate change indicators
In a report released Wednesday, the United Nations warns that greenhouse gas concentrations, sea level rise, ocean heat and ocean acidification have set new records.


You can share an article by clicking on the share icons at the top right of it.
The total or partial reproduction of an article, without the prior written authorization of Le Monde, is strictly forbidden.
For more information, see our Terms and Conditions.
For all authorization requests, contact syndication@lemonde.fr.


https://www.lemonde.fr/en/environment/article/2022/05/21/the-un-is-concerned-about-new-records-broken-in-2021-by-four-key-climate-change-indicators_5984216_114.html


In its May 18 report entitled "State of the Global Climate in 2021," the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) warns that the global energy system is leading humanity to disaster. According to the report, four key indicators of climate change have broken new records in 2021: greenhouse gas concentrations, sea level rise, ocean heat and ocean acidification. "Our climate is changing before our eyes," said WMO chief Petteri Taalas.
"The heat trapped by human-induced greenhouse gases will warm the planet for many generations to come. Sea level rise, ocean heat and acidification will continue for hundreds of years unless means to remove carbon from the atmosphere are invented."
The report is "a dismal litany of humanity's failure to tackle climate disruption," said UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres. "The global energy system is broken and bringing us ever closer to climate catastrophe," Mr. Guterres warned, urging the world to "end fossil fuel pollution and accelerate the renewable energy transition before we incinerate our only home."
The WMO has stated that human activity is bringing about global changes – on land, in the ocean and in the atmosphere – with harmful and lasting ramifications for ecosystems.
The report confirmed that the past seven years were the seven warmest years on record. Weather events related to La Niña at the beginning and end of 2021 had a cooling effect on global temperatures last year. But 2021 remains one of the warmest years on record, with an average global temperature of about 1.11 C above the pre-industrial level. The 2015 Paris climate agreement aims to limit global warming to 1.5 C above the pre-industrial era.
More on this topic Subscribers only Carbon capture, geoengineering... A global climate commission focuses on the impact of exceeding 1.5°C
'A warming world'
Four key climate change indicators "build a consistent picture of a warming world that touches all parts of the Earth system," the report says.
Greenhouse gas concentrations reached a new global peak in 2020, when the global concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) reached 413.2 parts per million (ppm), or 149% of the pre-industrial level. The data indicate that the levels continued to increase in 2021 and early 2022, with the monthly average CO2 concentration at Mauna Loa in Hawaii reaching 416.45 ppm in April 2020, 419.05 ppm in April 2021 and 420.23 ppm in April 2022, according to the report.
Global mean sea level reached a new record high in 2021, rising an average of 4.5 millimeters per year over the period 2013-2021. The rise had averaged 2.1 millimeters per year between 1993 and 2002, with the increase between the two periods mostly due to the accelerated loss of ice mass from the ice sheets.
Ocean temperatures also reached a record high last year, exceeding the 2020 value, according to the report. It is expected that the top 2,000 meters of ocean depth "will continue to warm in the future – a change which is irreversible on centennial to millennial time scales," the WMO writes, adding that the heat is penetrating ever deeper.
New
Le Monde’s app
Get the most out of your experience: download the app to enjoy Le Monde in English anywhere, anytime
Download
The ocean absorbs about 23% of annual human-caused CO2 emissions to the atmosphere. Although this slows the increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations, the CO2 reacts with seawater and leads to ocean acidification.
At the same time, the report states that the Antarctic ozone hole was unusually deep and large in 2021, driven by a strong and stable polar vortex.
More on this topic Subscribers only Global warming: The 425 'carbon bombs' that could thwart the battle against rising temperatures
Mr. Guterres proposed five actions to jump-start the renewable energy transition before it's too late: ending fossil fuel subsidies, tripling investment in renewable energy, simplifying bureaucratic procedures, securing the supply of raw materials for renewable energy technologies and making these technologies – such as battery storage – freely available global public goods. "If we act together, the renewable energy transformation can be the peace project of the 21st century," said Mr. Guterres.
https://www.lemonde.fr/en/environment/article/2022/05/21/the-un-is-concerned-about-new-records-broken-in-2021-by-four-key-climate-change-indicators_5984216_114.html




Le Monde 3
Climate change: The summer that ended indifference for the French
Citizens, politicians and scientists experienced extreme weather events in full swing throughout the summer, most related to climate change. What lasting impressions will be left on the collective consciousness?
Published on August 22, 2022, at 5:00 am (Paris), updated on March 15, 2023, at 9:44 am 
10 min read
 
People watch on from a field as a fire consumes the forest of Broceliande, in Brittany, western France, which broke out during the night of August 11 to 12, 2022. GUILLAUME HERBAUT / AGENCE VU
It arrived by surprise, like a bad omen. On August 2, a 4-meter beluga whale was seen in the Eure river. Like a ghostly white shadow in the murky water, it slowly made its way up the Seine, before being blocked by the Saint-Pierre-la-Garenne lock, 100 kilometers from Paris. What was the marine mammal doing so far from the Arctic Circle? Had it been disoriented by the offshore wind turbines when it entered the waters of northern Europe? Has global warming changed marine currents changed to the point of causing the animal's confusion? Or was the beluga, which is renowned for its intelligence, simply too curious, eventually paying for the dream of freedom with its life?
Dozens of experts have tried to understand, in vain. Some of them exclude global warming as the cause of its solitary wandering, while others claim, on the contrary, that it is a serious hypothesis.
No matter. In the collective imagination, the disturbing apparition was seen as a symbol, a warning. A diffuse and disturbing manifestation of something that has gone terribly wrong. "It was as if a goldfish had been found in a field," said Karima, 54, a social worker in the Paris region (people cited only by their first names wished to remain anonymous). Karima was moved by the attempts to rescue the whale which, in the end, was euthanized. "This story made me sad," she said. "I told myself that something was wrong."
Read more Subscribers only France's failed beluga rescue raises questions and criticism
Something was indeed wrong. And this summer, that has been seen and felt all over France. The Mediterranean island of Corsica, on Thursday, August 18, found itself swept by storms of unprecedented violence, with 200 km/h winds causing the death of five people. "In five minutes, it was hell," said holidaymakers in Sagone, South Corsica, describing an "apocalyptic" spectacle. The government declared a state of natural disaster.
Since last week, thunderstorms and torrential rains have shrouded the country. In the Old Port of Marseille, the sea overflowed, flooding adjacent streets and two tunnels. In Hyères, west of Marseille, the rain was followed by hailstones the size of marbles.
'It's right in front of us'
But it all started with the heat. Exhausting heat waves, one after the other. Temperature records were recorded in Nantes (39.1°C), Bordeaux (40°C), Biarritz (42.9°C) and Toulouse (35°C), where temperatures did not drop for more than 20 days. The drought – the most intense that France has experienced since the middle of the 20th century – has affected almost every part of the country. And the thunderstorms of the last few days will do nothing to mend the problem. The soil is too dry and impenetrable.
A caretaker feeds a hedgehog that was taken in the CSAM wildlife center due to hot weather and drought in Saint-Cezaire-Sur-Siagne, France, August 1, 2022. ÉRIC GAILLARD/REUTERS
"This summer, three of the main risks associated with global warming have materialized: risks to health and ecosystems on land and at sea due to extreme heat; water shortages; and the loss of agricultural yields. The fourth, yet to come, is the risk of flooding," said climatologist Valérie Masson-Delmotte, who points out that all these risks were highlighted in the latest report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which she co-chairs.
Read more Subscribers only Valérie Masson-Delmotte: 'We are trotting slowly behind a climate that is changing at a gallop'
The summer was also deadly for glaciers, making many mountaineering routes impassable, such as the Dent du Géant and the Arête des Cosmiques, in the Alps. The forests, too, have been damaged. The weakened trees become dormant. Their leaves turn yellow and fall. Some do not cope and die.
Everywhere, thousands of hectares have burned in gigantic infernos, notably in the Gironde and Landes departments of southwestern France – but also in Lozère, Aveyron, Isère, Drôme, Maine-et-Loire, and even the Jura, which has the highest rainfall index in France. Formerly confined to the South of France, wildfires have spread to the North. In the western region of Brittany, the fires took parts of the legendary forest of Brocéliande, where Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table lived, according to Breton tradition.
It has been a summer of all-time records and verbal exaggerations. The firefighters say they have never seen anything like it. "It's an ogre, it's a monster," said the president of the national firefighters federation, Gregory Allione, referring to the Gironde fire, on RTL radio on August 11. "Almost everywhere, I've heard people say: 'Never in living memory have we seen anything like it,'" said freshly-named Environment Minister Christophe Béchu, adding that this summer "illustrates what scientists have been predicting for years." But this time, "it's not numbers or projections, it's right in front of our eyes," he continued, "Everyone understands that global warming is real, that we are behind and that we will have to adapt." According to him, there will be "a before and after."
'Everything is dying a slow death'
Gilles Savary, a former socialist MP from Gironde, also said that the summer's diabolical fires upset a population already traumatized by the fires of 1949, which had caused several dozen deaths. But he believes that people have been more scarred by the drought and the considerable heat: "Farmers are in a panic, they see it all happening so quickly. It's not an evolution, it's a sprint." For Mr. Savary, no doubt, 2022 will be a "pivotal, historic year" for "representations and collective awareness." "The gap between the discourse of specialists and elites and what the public is experiencing has narrowed considerably," he said.
Green Paris MP Sandrine Rousseau is less optimistic. She does not believe in this being a tipping point. "There is an awareness that something is wrong, but the causal relation is not understood," she said. "Everyone deplores the drought, the fires and the storms, but acts as if they were independent of our models of society, consumption and growth. I don't see that being questioned anywhere."
Read more Subscribers only Summer of extreme weather highlights stark reality: The Mediterranean Sea is warming, fast
Film director and environmental activist Cyril Dion has the same concerns. He regrets that we are now in a phase of "emergency management," as was the case with the epidemic related to Covid-19, with "nobody talking about sufficiency." "The government is taking its time, they don't want to take systematic measures that might not necessarily be very good for competitiveness and would create complications. But we should be insulating all buildings and drastically reducing air traffic, as well as the number of vehicles on the road," he said.
Climate change has been in the headlines all summer long. Almost every evening, the national meteorological service's maps are shown on television, in bright red. The front pages of the newspapers, too, are alarmist. As are the notifications on smartphones: "Lightning, hail, floods: What to do in the event of storms," alerted BFM-TV, before announcing, the next day, that the heat wave was returning. "In pictures: France on fire and bone-dry," headlined Le Point magazine.
In Brittany, the hydrangeas are under threat. In Provence, the cicadas have stopped singing. The island of Noirmoutier, in the West, has seen its salt marshes dry up. The Verdon Gorge in the South has lost six meters in depth and the water, once so clear, has become murky and muddy. "People are forced to mourn the landscapes they love and will no longer find," said Ms. Masson-Delmotte. "Many had built a shell to avoid seeing the gravity of the situation and to avoid having to change their ways. What happened this summer has crushed these shells. It's the end of indifference."
Read more Subscribers only Adapt or die: Plant life in France feels the effects of continuing drought
That includes those most informed. Like the Parisian journalist who arrived in Nièvre (central France) in early August for a weekend, and who was scolded by her friends when she absentmindedly raved about the "nice weather," which was so different from 2021. "How can anyone say such a thing?" said a dismayed Ghislain de Fonclare, the first deputy mayor of Monceaux-le-Comte. Mr. de Fonclare is an actor left Paris to settle in a house on the edge of the Morvan mountain range, on the banks of the Yonne river, where he lives with film director Guillaume Bureau. In five years, they have seen the environment around them change.
But the summer of 2022, like 2019, has been the worst yet: The grass in the garden is bare, as are the fields around it, tomatoes in the vegetable patch are "sunburned," apples are rotting... And the great trees of the Nièvre, so beautiful, are "suffering" and sometimes "dying." "We get the impression that everything is slowly dying around us while we live behind closed doors," said Mr. Bureau. Since the beginning of this scorching summer, the young filmmaker has been checking the weather forecast "15 times a day, hoping that the trend will change." "We feel like the world is disappearing, it's making us very melancholic," he said, without hiding that he has been struck by "eco-anxiety."
Read more Subscribers only Heat waves and eco-anxiety: 'Knowing that the problem isn't being taken seriously makes me deeply angry'
'Everyone was talking about it'
Fear, however, is a bad advisor, warned the leader of the conservative Les Républicains senators, Bruno Retailleau. "Tetanization means the immobilism of degrowthists, or the fatalism of collapsologists," he said. He regrets that "some people no longer believe in the strength of human genius, the opportunities that science and innovation offer us to provide answers to climate disruption." He added: "Of course, sufficiency is necessary and these climatic events remind us that the human condition is not free of conditions, and that we must pay attention to the question of limits. But these events also call on us to be inventive in order to decarbonize activities and store water and develop differently in the face of natural risks."
On the road to Santiago de Compostela, which is very busy in summer, pilgrims and hikers have all been confronted with the consequences of global warming. Burned fields, dried-out forests, dry rivers, dead birds. It was a slap in the face, even a revelation, for many of those who, pious or not, have walked a section of the "camino".
Read more Subscribers only The drought-hit Loire, a river in the process of 'tropicalization'
"Everyone was talking about it," said Victor, a 42-year-old lobbyist, who in early August walked between Le Puy-en-Velay and Conques was "moved" to see the river Lot, sad and dark, carrying dead leaves, under 40°C heat. A farmer he met in the hamlet of Ramourouscle showed him his sunburned lentils and shared his concern for his seven cows, which he feeds with hay stocks intended for the fall, due to the lack of fresh grass this summer: "But how are we going to make it through the winter?"
Cows graze in a dry pasture, during a drought in Rancourt, France, August 10, 2022. PASCAL ROSSIGNOL / REUTERS
On the road, Victor also met Florence Michel. In Lyon, the 53-year-old teacher lives surrounded by friends who drive SUVs, love meat (her former partner is a Michelin-starred chef) and make fun of the environmentalist mayor, Grégory Doucet, who they nickname"the Khmer Vert." Florence admitted that she has also often been annoyed by the Greens, which she called "a caste of self-righteous lecturers." It was during a family lunch, in the spring, that she became aware of the climate problem, to which her brother had just converted after listening to a conference. He gave up jet-skiing and changed his way of life. "It was as if he had discovered Christ," said the teacher, amused, who understood in turn that we could "no longer live like before." She now proscribes plastic, buys her detergent in reusable containers and no longer prints paper. What she observed while walking in the Aubrac countryside (south-central France) this summer was only a "confirmation" that there was "an urgency to act," with the diffuse feeling that the political response was not up to the task.
"It's true," said Ms. Masson-Delmotte, "we're slowly trotting behind a climate that is changing rapidly." The expert said she was "struck" by the "growing awareness," particularly among local elected officials. But the conditions are not yet in place to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the coming years, she said, regretting that the proposals of the Citizens Convention for Climate (a group of randomly selected French citizens) that leaned towards sufficiency were not implemented by the governments. "This summer, we didn't anticipate water shortages even though there were warnings," she said. "Are we going to be able to get people on board for profound transformations? Beyond emergency responses, we need to build a collective roadmap."
A new 'national plan'
Mr. Béchu, the environment minister, is defending the government's measures taken this summer, including a decree signed at the end of July to monitor water levels more effectively. At the end of the summer, he will bring together the prefects in charge of water to move towards better water management. And he will implement a new "national plan for adaptation to climate change." "Seeing as we won't be able to prevent global warming, whatever our efforts, we must be able to limit its effects while adapting to it," he said. A bill to accelerate the development of renewable energies will also be tabled in Parliament in the fall.
A picture taken on August 19, 2022 shows the Saint-Michel Chapel on a small island in the middle of the Serre-Ponçon lake, in Savine le Lac in French Alps as water level decreased 14 meters due to the drought. JOEL SAGET / AFP
After the summer of 2019, which was also marked by intense heat, environmental protection became the primary concern of the French, ahead of the welfare state and purchasing power. But then attention died down.
Brice Teinturier, the deputy director general of market research company Ipsos, pointed out that 30% of people in France remain climate skeptics. Above all, he does not believe in the "naive conception that consists in saying: the worse the incidents, the more people will change their behavior." The pollster observed, moreover, that part of the population seems to have "run out of steam," considering that they already make "a lot of effort" and that it would be necessary for the State and companies to take over. "There's also a strong tension between purchasing power and the desire to act in favor of the environment," said Mr. Teinturier. "Awareness is not enough."
Read more Subscribers only Wildlife shelter in eastern France sees effects of climate change
Socialist MP Boris Vallaud, whose department, the Landes, was devastated by the fires, believes the summer of 2022 will trigger "popular support," that is to say "what was missing from environmental policy." "We are now more afraid of the evil than the remedy," he said. "We must now take political advantage of this to transform our societies in every dimension.é
Armelle, a senior civil servant, 45, does not say otherwise. While she admits to having shut herself up for a long time in denial, "or rather in deliberate ignorance," this summer will have been a powerful revelation. Just like during Covid-19, she forced herself to watch the news and to see the pictures, which then haunted her. Today, she said she was ready to change her ways, even considering "restrictions of freedom" if the number of flights was to be limited. In Paris, for part of July, she suffered from the heat and thought the city now resembled Madrid. "Summer used to be my favorite season," she said, "but that's finished. Today, I can't wait for it to be over."
https://www.lemonde.fr/en/politics/article/2022/08/22/climate-change-and-the-french-the-summer-that-ended-indifference_5994354_5.html


Diplomatique 2
 Ancient forest holds clues to climate resilience
In an age when ‘well-managed’ forests are in fact short-lived monocultures with little climate resilience, scientists in the Pyrenees are discovering how old-growth forests cope with rising temperatures.
the Albera massif in the eastern Pyrenees is a microcosm of the problems facing France’s forests, which are now at serious risk from climate change. In spring 2023 the slopes on one side were covered by luxuriant ancient forest with a biodiversity unique in Europe; the other side had been left bare by fire. France’s forests, suffering from overexploitation, as well as diseases, parasites, invasive species, dieback, drought, fires and storms, are nearing collapse and losing their capacity to act as carbon sinks just when we need them most. In 2022 they captured only 27.6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2), down from an average of 40 million a year over the previous decade and 60 million in the decade before that; some in the Grand Est region now release more CO2 than they absorb (1). Between 2005 and 2020, tree mortality rose by 54% (2).
A visit to the Massane nature reserve, however, should revive hope even in the most pessimistic. As you enter, there’s a view of the stretch of land between the coastal towns of Cerbère and Banyuls, where fire destroyed over 1,000 hectares of woodland in mid-April 2023. But up here, 600m above sea level, it’s a different story. The reserve enjoys France’s highest level of protection and is run by the Amis de la Massane association, which includes a group of scientists from the Banyuls-sur-Mer Oceanological Observatory (OOB), which has links to the National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) and Sorbonne University.
Why should a tiny patch of forest at the edge of the Pyrenees – only 336 hectares out of 17.3 million in France – be of such interest? To the OOB scientists, it’s not just a forest, it’s an open-air laboratory. The reserve is home to 12,500 recorded plant and animal species, remarkable given its size.
The reason for this biodiversity lies in the forest’s great age, its location – near the sea, at a geographical and climatic crossroads where Iberian, Western European and Mediterranean influences meet – and a low level of human interference. It’s been shielded from human activity for 150 years, ever since forest engineers first decided that the upper Massane valley should be protected. As the entire valley had been exploited, the little river that rises high in the hills of the reserve exposed the villages below to a serious risk of mudslides. The forest helped to prevent erosion and stabilise the soil.
Protecting forests so that they will protect us is not a new idea, but it’s more political than it may initially seem. Though open to ramblers, the Massane reserve is closed to commercial exploitation. No logging or wood gathering is allowed, and a large part is entirely untended. Fallen branches litter the ground, and dead trees are left standing: it’s very different from other ‘well-managed’ forests.
The importance of old forests
But for the people in charge at Massane, ‘well-managed’ forests are the whole problem. ‘I grew up in the Landes. We used to talk about going for a walk in the forest,’ said Élodie Magnanou, a research engineer at the OOB and deputy chair of the reserve’s management team. ‘But what you have in the Landes isn’t a forest, it’s a plantation – a field full of trees waiting to be harvested, a far cry from natural ecosystems. People in France really don’t understand the complexity and importance of old-growth forests like Massane. A plantation is made up of trees that are all the same age and planted by humans. In almost every case, their predecessors were clear-cut. They’re often all the same species, grown from clones, and are felled early, at around 40 years old, which is far less than their natural lifespan.’
This kind of forestry has created a paradox. France’s forest cover has doubled since the late 19th century, but according to Daniel Vallauri, a senior forest programme manager at WWF France, it fails to achieve an environmental balance: ‘Our forests are young, and for the last 30 years we’ve been steadily reducing the age at which trees can be felled. There are fewer big trees, so less carbon is being captured. And what with fire and storms, in some regions today – the Grand Est and the Landes for instance – they’re depleting the value of forests by felling much more timber than grows each year. Our forests today have around 200 cubic metres of wood per hectare, but with different exploitation methods, there could be up to a third more, like Massane.’
The beech forest at Massane has unparalleled biodiversity and has been listed as a UNESCO world heritage site since 2021. Some of the trees, dated by core sampling, go back to 1840; some specimens of other species in the reserve are hundreds of years old, and soil carbon analysis indicates the forest itself has been here for at least 8,000 years, making it an invaluable resource for the study of tree evolution and climate resilience.
Diane Sorel, head of the Massane conservation team, said, ‘The problem is we don’t allow our forests to grow old. The natural lifecycle of a forest is on a very different scale from our own and from the production cycle. Commercial forestry disrupts the natural system: there’s no effort to protect the soil, and when trees are felled the carbon that’s stored in it is released, largely through microorganism respiration.’ At Massane, individual trees develop their root systems in response to their surroundings. ‘Do you know why trees in the Landes topple like dominoes every time there’s a storm?’ Magnanou asked. ‘It’s because they’re planted in straight rows and they’re all the same size. During storm Klaus, in 2009, we lost virtually no trees at Massane.’
Secrets of Massane’s beeches
Storm resistance is not Massane’s only strength. The beech forest, with the river running through it, lies at the heart of the reserve. In April 2023 researchers were concerned about the abnormally low water level in the river and the carpet of dead leaves on the ground, more like autumn than spring. Rainfall is on a downward trend across the eastern Pyrenees, and the total for 2023 was 480mm, far lower than the annual average of 1,200mm. Beeches are having a particularly hard time of it: they like cool, humid conditions, but the eastern Pyrenees are hot and dry. And yet, for the time being, the beeches at Massane seem to be faring better than those in Belgium or at Fontainebleau in France. Scientists say this is primarily because there has been so little human intervention.
Massane is a freely evolving forest ecosystem. Magnanou said, ‘Its great advantage is that nobody has interfered with it. It’s been allowed to evolve naturally, with no artificial selection criteria imposed by humans.’ ‘Artificial’ is a broad term that could cover a range of different forestry practices. Would truly free evolution mean eliminating all human influence? ‘That’s one option,’ Sorel said, ‘though unfortunately you can’t control atmospheric inputs or pollution. At Massane, we decided not to interfere with the forest, except for continuing some traditional activities that make up for the absence of large herbivores.’
The Massane forest shatters many preconceptions. Deadwood management is a good example: though deadwood plays an essential part in natural forest ecosystems, it’s banished from commercial plantations, largely out of fear that it will form debris dams in streams. ‘But wood that ends up in waterways decomposes quickly,’ said Sorel. ‘It’s important to the functions of a river, especially at its mouth: many animals, and little worm-like molluscs called teredos, live on it and help to break it down. They all have a place in the cycle.’
It’s the same with forest soil, where the meiofauna – mushrooms, bacteria and micro-animals – help to break down deadwood so that trees feed the soil after they die. The Massane researchers estimate that deadwood shelters half the reserve’s recorded species. ‘If you remove it, you’re destroying half your biodiversity and unbalancing the entire ecosystem,’ Sorel said. ‘It’s like skipping a meal every day. The forest inevitably becomes weaker, and the trees are more vulnerable to disease and less resistant to hot weather. Which is exactly what’s happening to French forests today.’ But isn’t deadwood a problem in the event of fire? ‘We’ve never had a fire at Massane. Deadwood acts like a sponge, storing and releasing water. It’s like gardeners spreading straw on the ground.’
The Massane team know what they’re talking about. Since 1999 they have mapped 28 hectares, within which they have fenced off 9.6 hectares of beech forest, sequencing the genome of some 70,000 specimens. They have also catalogued larger deadwood fragments. It’s a Herculean task, and they check it all two or three times per year. The data enables them to monitor the forest closely, especially for the impact of climate change. ‘Conditions are getting hard for beeches,’ said Magnanou. ‘We’re restricting livestock grazing to the summit pastures [above the treeline], getting the cows out of the forest to help the beeches regenerate.’
All these efforts to promote diversity of tree age and genomes help to explain Massane’s climate resilience, and other things too. The scientists have been monitoring a species of cynips wasp from China which induces galls that prevent terminal buds from opening. In the Ardèche department, where this wasp has caused extensive damage to chestnut trees, they have imported its natural predator, a torymus wasp, but Magnanou feels this was a mistake: ‘The reservoir of biodiversity we have here brought the invasion under control within two years, and we didn’t have to lift a finger. There’s a risk that the species they’ve imported could attack other insects too.’
She likened a forest ecosystem to a complex network in which everything is interlinked: any gap in the network and the least disturbance (invasive species, drought, climate change) will damage its fabric. By contrast, ‘when you have such a strong network of interactions, it’s hard for invasive species to spread, because there’s no room for them. In a highly artificial environment such as a commercial plantation, there are many ecological niches they can occupy.’
With their greater diversity and resistance to environmental disruption (atmospheric pollution, human pressures, invasive species) and climate change, old-growth forests are vitally important to the preservation of ecosystems and biodiversity. Yet in France almost all have vanished. And those evolving freely, such as Massane, now account for barely 0.24% of France’s forest cover. Though the preservation of old-growth forests (2-3% of cover) is written into France’s National Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, there is no specific legislation to ensure it.
Climate change survivors
A sad example is the beech forest at Ciron, in the Gironde department. As one of western Europe’s oldest forests, it offers a unique opportunity to study how old-growth forests survive climate change. Alexis Ducousso, a research engineer at INRAE (National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and Environment), learned of it by chance in 1991. Like three quarters of all French forests, it was then entirely privately owned. It forced Ducousso to ‘discard everything [he] had learned in ecology classes’. An initial genetic study revealed that it’s different from all other beech forests in Europe. Another found that there’s more diversity within the Ciron beech population than between those of Normandy and the Balkans. Another peculiarity is that Ciron beeches crossbreed among themselves. Unable to explain the trees’ survival in such a warm climate, the scientists looked into the forest’s origins. ‘We were astonished,’ Ducousso said, ‘to find that beeches were already around during the last ice age.’ The oldest charcoal unearthed in the Ciron valley dates back 43,000 years. Yet at that time, Europe’s forests had virtually all died out. This means the Ciron beeches survived the transition from the ice age to our current climate, which is theoretically far too warm for them.
The Ciron beech forest survived thousands of years – until the advent of the chainsaw. In 1991 it stretched 35km along the banks of the Ciron; today, just 4.5km. ‘The heart of the beech forest is still there, but so many individual trees and the ecosystems they supported are gone,’ said Ducousso. ‘We’ve lost an important genetic resource, as well as the possibility of beeches returning to the Ciron valley.’ How did that happen? ‘Storms, people with chainsaws and forestry companies clearing deciduous woodland to plant conifers.’
The Ciron forest, designated as an environmentally sensitive area and part of the EU’s Natura 2000 protected areas network, has been gradually bought up by the Gironde department and is now better known to the public as well as researchers like Jérôme Ogée of INRAE’s Nouvelle Aquitaine-Bordeaux branch, an expert on forest interactions with climate change. One of his studies focuses on microclimates, especially in Ciron’s riparian forest – the part of the forest by the river – which is particularly biodiverse. ‘During summer heatwaves the difference in temperature between woodland on the Landes plateau and this riparian forest, only 100m away, can be as much as 4ºC. That’s huge. And the humidity can differ by 15%.’ These fine-scale microclimatic variations could play a determining role in the future of French forests. ‘We’re trying to find solutions amidst widespread climate anxiety. Areas like riparian forests are micro-sanctuaries for our vanishing deciduous species. It’s imperative that we invest in them to protect genetic variety and prevent as many species as possible from going extinct.’
The importance of Ciron is not just its genetic wealth and its microclimate. Ogée said, ‘Soil like you find in the Ciron forest, which has never been ploughed as happens after clear-cutting, stores an enormous amount of carbon. To avoid all that carbon escaping, we need to avoid disturbing the soil in old-growth forests in particular.’ Scientists are also starting to understand how riparian forests act as natural firebreaks. ‘The bigger and healthier the riparian forest, and the denser the buffer zone around it, the more effective it is as a firebreak,’ Ogée said. ‘So it’s vital that we control clear-cutting and commercial forestry to protect these forests.’
Despite all these merits, the Ciron forest has no real legal protection. Commercial logging, whether clear-cutting or otherwise, continues around its edges. ‘It’s always hard to determine if tree felling has been done legally,’ Ducousso explained. ‘Though properties of more than 20 hectares are required to have management plans that cover felling, the public can’t see them.’
However, since December 2023 France’s freedom of information commission (CADA) has taken the view that some sections of private forest management plans should be made available on demand. The Regional Forest Ownership Centre (CRPF), which helps forest owners with management, authorises these plans and should in theory be monitoring them. ‘In the Aquitaine region, they are now too shorthanded to handle authorisations properly, let alone monitor plans,’ said Ducousso. It’s a similar story at the National Forests Office (ONF), which manages many of France’s public forests: its workforce has been cut from 12,800 in 2000 to just 8,000 today.
T
he Albera massif in the eastern Pyrenees is a microcosm of the problems facing France’s forests, which are now at serious risk from climate change. In spring 2023 the slopes on one side were covered by luxuriant ancient forest with a biodiversity unique in Europe; the other side had been left bare by fire. France’s forests, suffering from overexploitation, as well as diseases, parasites, invasive species, dieback, drought, fires and storms, are nearing collapse and losing their capacity to act as carbon sinks just when we need them most. In 2022 they captured only 27.6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2), down from an average of 40 million a year over the previous decade and 60 million in the decade before that; some in the Grand Est region now release more CO2 than they absorb (1). Between 2005 and 2020, tree mortality rose by 54% (2).
A visit to the Massane nature reserve, however, should revive hope even in the most pessimistic. As you enter, there’s a view of the stretch of land between the coastal towns of Cerbère and Banyuls, where fire destroyed over 1,000 hectares of woodland in mid-April 2023. But up here, 600m above sea level, it’s a different story. The reserve enjoys France’s highest level of protection and is run by the Amis de la Massane association, which includes a group of scientists from the Banyuls-sur-Mer Oceanological Observatory (OOB), which has links to the National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) and Sorbonne University.
Why should a tiny patch of forest at the edge of the Pyrenees – only 336 hectares out of 17.3 million in France – be of such interest? To the OOB scientists, it’s not just a forest, it’s an open-air laboratory. The reserve is home to 12,500 recorded plant and animal species, remarkable given its size.
The reason for this biodiversity lies in the forest’s great age, its location – near the sea, at a geographical and climatic crossroads where Iberian, Western European and Mediterranean influences meet – and a low level of human interference. It’s been shielded from human activity for 150 years, ever since forest engineers first decided that the upper Massane valley should be protected. As the entire valley had been exploited, the little river that rises high in the hills of the reserve exposed the villages below to a serious risk of mudslides. The forest helped to prevent erosion and stabilise the soil.
Protecting forests so that they will protect us is not a new idea, but it’s more political than it may initially seem. Though open to ramblers, the Massane reserve is closed to commercial exploitation. No logging or wood gathering is allowed, and a large part is entirely untended. Fallen branches litter the ground, and dead trees are left standing: it’s very different from other ‘well-managed’ forests.
The importance of old forests
But for the people in charge at Massane, ‘well-managed’ forests are the whole problem. ‘I grew up in the Landes. We used to talk about going for a walk in the forest,’ said Élodie Magnanou, a research engineer at the OOB and deputy chair of the reserve’s management team. ‘But what you have in the Landes isn’t a forest, it’s a plantation – a field full of trees waiting to be harvested, a far cry from natural ecosystems. People in France really don’t understand the complexity and importance of old-growth forests like Massane. A plantation is made up of trees that are all the same age and planted by humans. In almost every case, their predecessors were clear-cut. They’re often all the same species, grown from clones, and are felled early, at around 40 years old, which is far less than their natural lifespan.’
This kind of forestry has created a paradox. France’s forest cover has doubled since the late 19th century, but according to Daniel Vallauri, a senior forest programme manager at WWF France, it fails to achieve an environmental balance: ‘Our forests are young, and for the last 30 years we’ve been steadily reducing the age at which trees can be felled. There are fewer big trees, so less carbon is being captured. And what with fire and storms, in some regions today – the Grand Est and the Landes for instance – they’re depleting the value of forests by felling much more timber than grows each year. Our forests today have around 200 cubic metres of wood per hectare, but with different exploitation methods, there could be up to a third more, like Massane.’
The beech forest at Massane has unparalleled biodiversity and has been listed as a UNESCO world heritage site since 2021. Some of the trees, dated by core sampling, go back to 1840; some specimens of other species in the reserve are hundreds of years old, and soil carbon analysis indicates the forest itself has been here for at least 8,000 years, making it an invaluable resource for the study of tree evolution and climate resilience.
Diane Sorel, head of the Massane conservation team, said, ‘The problem is we don’t allow our forests to grow old. The natural lifecycle of a forest is on a very different scale from our own and from the production cycle. Commercial forestry disrupts the natural system: there’s no effort to protect the soil, and when trees are felled the carbon that’s stored in it is released, largely through microorganism respiration.’ At Massane, individual trees develop their root systems in response to their surroundings. ‘Do you know why trees in the Landes topple like dominoes every time there’s a storm?’ Magnanou asked. ‘It’s because they’re planted in straight rows and they’re all the same size. During storm Klaus, in 2009, we lost virtually no trees at Massane.’
Secrets of Massane’s beeches
Storm resistance is not Massane’s only strength. The beech forest, with the river running through it, lies at the heart of the reserve. In April 2023 researchers were concerned about the abnormally low water level in the river and the carpet of dead leaves on the ground, more like autumn than spring. Rainfall is on a downward trend across the eastern Pyrenees, and the total for 2023 was 480mm, far lower than the annual average of 1,200mm. Beeches are having a particularly hard time of it: they like cool, humid conditions, but the eastern Pyrenees are hot and dry. And yet, for the time being, the beeches at Massane seem to be faring better than those in Belgium or at Fontainebleau in France. Scientists say this is primarily because there has been so little human intervention.
Massane is a freely evolving forest ecosystem. Magnanou said, ‘Its great advantage is that nobody has interfered with it. It’s been allowed to evolve naturally, with no artificial selection criteria imposed by humans.’ ‘Artificial’ is a broad term that could cover a range of different forestry practices. Would truly free evolution mean eliminating all human influence? ‘That’s one option,’ Sorel said, ‘though unfortunately you can’t control atmospheric inputs or pollution. At Massane, we decided not to interfere with the forest, except for continuing some traditional activities that make up for the absence of large herbivores.’
The Massane forest shatters many preconceptions. Deadwood management is a good example: though deadwood plays an essential part in natural forest ecosystems, it’s banished from commercial plantations, largely out of fear that it will form debris dams in streams. ‘But wood that ends up in waterways decomposes quickly,’ said Sorel. ‘It’s important to the functions of a river, especially at its mouth: many animals, and little worm-like molluscs called teredos, live on it and help to break it down. They all have a place in the cycle.’
It’s the same with forest soil, where the meiofauna – mushrooms, bacteria and micro-animals – help to break down deadwood so that trees feed the soil after they die. The Massane researchers estimate that deadwood shelters half the reserve’s recorded species. ‘If you remove it, you’re destroying half your biodiversity and unbalancing the entire ecosystem,’ Sorel said. ‘It’s like skipping a meal every day. The forest inevitably becomes weaker, and the trees are more vulnerable to disease and less resistant to hot weather. Which is exactly what’s happening to French forests today.’ But isn’t deadwood a problem in the event of fire? ‘We’ve never had a fire at Massane. Deadwood acts like a sponge, storing and releasing water. It’s like gardeners spreading straw on the ground.’
The Massane team know what they’re talking about. Since 1999 they have mapped 28 hectares, within which they have fenced off 9.6 hectares of beech forest, sequencing the genome of some 70,000 specimens. They have also catalogued larger deadwood fragments. It’s a Herculean task, and they check it all two or three times per year. The data enables them to monitor the forest closely, especially for the impact of climate change. ‘Conditions are getting hard for beeches,’ said Magnanou. ‘We’re restricting livestock grazing to the summit pastures [above the treeline], getting the cows out of the forest to help the beeches regenerate.’
All these efforts to promote diversity of tree age and genomes help to explain Massane’s climate resilience, and other things too. The scientists have been monitoring a species of cynips wasp from China which induces galls that prevent terminal buds from opening. In the Ardèche department, where this wasp has caused extensive damage to chestnut trees, they have imported its natural predator, a torymus wasp, but Magnanou feels this was a mistake: ‘The reservoir of biodiversity we have here brought the invasion under control within two years, and we didn’t have to lift a finger. There’s a risk that the species they’ve imported could attack other insects too.’
She likened a forest ecosystem to a complex network in which everything is interlinked: any gap in the network and the least disturbance (invasive species, drought, climate change) will damage its fabric. By contrast, ‘when you have such a strong network of interactions, it’s hard for invasive species to spread, because there’s no room for them. In a highly artificial environment such as a commercial plantation, there are many ecological niches they can occupy.’
With their greater diversity and resistance to environmental disruption (atmospheric pollution, human pressures, invasive species) and climate change, old-growth forests are vitally important to the preservation of ecosystems and biodiversity. Yet in France almost all have vanished. And those evolving freely, such as Massane, now account for barely 0.24% of France’s forest cover. Though the preservation of old-growth forests (2-3% of cover) is written into France’s National Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, there is no specific legislation to ensure it.
Climate change survivors
A sad example is the beech forest at Ciron, in the Gironde department. As one of western Europe’s oldest forests, it offers a unique opportunity to study how old-growth forests survive climate change. Alexis Ducousso, a research engineer at INRAE (National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and Environment), learned of it by chance in 1991. Like three quarters of all French forests, it was then entirely privately owned. It forced Ducousso to ‘discard everything [he] had learned in ecology classes’. An initial genetic study revealed that it’s different from all other beech forests in Europe. Another found that there’s more diversity within the Ciron beech population than between those of Normandy and the Balkans. Another peculiarity is that Ciron beeches crossbreed among themselves. Unable to explain the trees’ survival in such a warm climate, the scientists looked into the forest’s origins. ‘We were astonished,’ Ducousso said, ‘to find that beeches were already around during the last ice age.’ The oldest charcoal unearthed in the Ciron valley dates back 43,000 years. Yet at that time, Europe’s forests had virtually all died out. This means the Ciron beeches survived the transition from the ice age to our current climate, which is theoretically far too warm for them.
The Ciron beech forest survived thousands of years – until the advent of the chainsaw. In 1991 it stretched 35km along the banks of the Ciron; today, just 4.5km. ‘The heart of the beech forest is still there, but so many individual trees and the ecosystems they supported are gone,’ said Ducousso. ‘We’ve lost an important genetic resource, as well as the possibility of beeches returning to the Ciron valley.’ How did that happen? ‘Storms, people with chainsaws and forestry companies clearing deciduous woodland to plant conifers.’
The Ciron forest, designated as an environmentally sensitive area and part of the EU’s Natura 2000 protected areas network, has been gradually bought up by the Gironde department and is now better known to the public as well as researchers like Jérôme Ogée of INRAE’s Nouvelle Aquitaine-Bordeaux branch, an expert on forest interactions with climate change. One of his studies focuses on microclimates, especially in Ciron’s riparian forest – the part of the forest by the river – which is particularly biodiverse. ‘During summer heatwaves the difference in temperature between woodland on the Landes plateau and this riparian forest, only 100m away, can be as much as 4ºC. That’s huge. And the humidity can differ by 15%.’ These fine-scale microclimatic variations could play a determining role in the future of French forests. ‘We’re trying to find solutions amidst widespread climate anxiety. Areas like riparian forests are micro-sanctuaries for our vanishing deciduous species. It’s imperative that we invest in them to protect genetic variety and prevent as many species as possible from going extinct.’
The importance of Ciron is not just its genetic wealth and its microclimate. Ogée said, ‘Soil like you find in the Ciron forest, which has never been ploughed as happens after clear-cutting, stores an enormous amount of carbon. To avoid all that carbon escaping, we need to avoid disturbing the soil in old-growth forests in particular.’ Scientists are also starting to understand how riparian forests act as natural firebreaks. ‘The bigger and healthier the riparian forest, and the denser the buffer zone around it, the more effective it is as a firebreak,’ Ogée said. ‘So it’s vital that we control clear-cutting and commercial forestry to protect these forests.’
Despite all these merits, the Ciron forest has no real legal protection. Commercial logging, whether clear-cutting or otherwise, continues around its edges. ‘It’s always hard to determine if tree felling has been done legally,’ Ducousso explained. ‘Though properties of more than 20 hectares are required to have management plans that cover felling, the public can’t see them.’
However, since December 2023 France’s freedom of information commission (CADA) has taken the view that some sections of private forest management plans should be made available on demand. The Regional Forest Ownership Centre (CRPF), which helps forest owners with management, authorises these plans and should in theory be monitoring them. ‘In the Aquitaine region, they are now too shorthanded to handle authorisations properly, let alone monitor plans,’ said Ducousso. It’s a similar story at the National Forests Office (ONF), which manages many of France’s public forests: its workforce has been cut from 12,800 in 2000 to just 8,000 today. 
Preserving our forests’ memory’
‘Emmanuel Macron has announced plans to plant a billion trees by 2030, but that won’t be much use if we can’t save the old-growth forests,’ said Sorel. ‘They preserve our forests’ memory. If we lose them and replace them with puny clones, we’ll be heading for trouble: they’ll be helpless against parasites and climate change, and we won’t be able to do anything about it.’ Planting new trees could in fact be counterproductive, especially as some already carried out under France’s post-Covid recovery plan (which allocated €150m to forests and set a target of 50 million new trees) was preceded by clear-cutting. And most of the new trees are Douglas firs, which may be ideal for industrial purposes but have little climate resilience, as a report by NGO Canopée-Forêts Vivantes reveals (3).
So public money may be contributing directly to the disturbance of forest soil, releasing CO2 and weakening forests. Canopée is especially critical of France’s largest forestry cooperative, Alliance Forêts Bois (AFB), whose methods it analysed in a report (4) after several cases of clear-cutting in mixed forests that had been regenerating naturally, notably in the Vienne department (nearly 20 hectares) and at Saint-Léger-de-Balson in the Gironde (2.5 hectares). ‘Clear-cutting only happens in a minority of cases,’ according to Bruno Doucet, a campaign manager for Canopée. ‘Felling that clears 50% or more of the cover affects an average of 85,000 hectares per year, which is only 0.5% of commercial woodland, according to the IGN. But it is spreading and is starting to find its way into public policy, notably because AFB has built its business model on such practices and is able to influence policymaking to its own advantage. The practice is starting to gain traction at the highest levels of government.’
Ogée, who has coordinated a study on the disastrous effects of clear-cutting (5), believes it’s a structural problem: ‘Cooperatives offer turnkey forestry solutions. Many owners have only small patches and are happy to be offered a complete forest management and production service that also covers ploughing and planting. Cooperatives offer all that, so there are often conflicts of interest.’ French law bans independent forest management companies from combining services to owners, such as carrying out work and selling wood, but cooperatives are not subject to this rule.
AFB issued a long statement (6) denying some of Canopée’s accusations (though these were backed by evidence), in which it recognised that the Saint-Léger-de-Balson clear-cut was ‘incorrectly implemented’ – but pointed out that it affected only one hectare of the Natura 2000 area. In response to the charge of conflicts of interest, AFB said it had been ‘established by and for private forest owners, who are responsible for our management. We manage forests, but do not own them. We bring together owners, especially of small and medium-sized areas of forest, many of which are remote and fragmented and which are often neglected. We offer three functions … enabling our members to benefit from integrated management of their forests and complete, personalised support. This is a great benefit for owners.’
The agriculture and food sovereignty minister’s office shares this view and says that cooperatives are ‘the equivalent of the ONF for private forests: both are paid by forest owners on the basis of the work they do and sales of wood they make, and they don’t need to buy and sell on wood like forest operators, whose earnings depend on the profit margins they achieve on sales.’ The ONF also denied that funds allocated to AFB had financed clear-cutting and told me that ‘grants to forest owners via AFB have made it possible to regenerate many hectares of damaged, vulnerable or unprofitable forest.’
How can France protect its forests and their soil from outdated felling practices permitted under current regulations? Before we can save what it is still possible to save, there is a vast amount of work to be done identifying the most important forests. Methods advocated notably by the Pro Sylva association allow natural regeneration through thinning, without unduly disturbing the soil (7). Ogée says, ‘You don’t hear much about it, but more and more plantations are failing, because people are planting unsuitable varieties in extreme microclimates. What we need today is tougher laws and regulations that will make it possible to protect riparian and old-growth forests, and promote the growing of a wide range of varieties.
Diplomatique 3
Smarter adaptation is not enough
Complex life on earth cannot adapt to 4°C of warming. As COP 28 opens in Dubai, the focus of efforts must be rapid emissions reduction – and accountability – as well as more intelligent adaptation.
L
ast year the global average temperature rose to 1.15°C above its preindustrial (1850-1900) level. For its part, France is struggling to maintain a trajectory that will keep its own rise below 2.5-3.0°C (temperatures rise faster on land). Should it, as the government suggested after a public consultation this summer, be preparing for a global rise of 3°C – and 4°C in France?
Climate projections indicate this scenario is not compatible with the survival of complex lifeforms on earth: droughts and heatwaves are already increasing the frequency of uncontrollable wildfires and massive crop failures. Given the inertia of climate change (long-term effects are not amenable to short-term actions), such extreme weather events will inevitably become more frequent and intense, and without a drastic cut in greenhouse gas emissions, scientists warn that global warming could drive the planet across a threshold, ‘raising the temperature further to activate other tipping elements in a domino-like cascade’ (1).
Accepting this scenario at global level would be to risk irreversible changes such as our tropical rainforests turning into savannahs, no longer able to function as carbon sinks. The polar ice caps would then melt even faster, accelerating sea level rise and weakening the major ocean currents that temper the climate of many parts of the world. Likely repercussions for European countries include epidemics of diseases hitherto unseen in Europe, and human migrations on a scale impossible to cope with.
The need to slow emissions
The UN’s 2015 Paris climate accord raised hopes of significantly slowing greenhouse gas emissions. But few countries have met their commitments, which were already inadequate for achieving the overall goal. Some companies have massively stepped up investment in fossil fuel exploration and extraction, and the development of new toxic chemicals – a total of around $2.2tr since 2016. Others – notably China Energy Investment Group (coal), TotalEnergies and Saudi Aramco (oil) – plan to continue exploiting fossil fuels until 2030, through projects known as ‘carbon bombs’ because of their potential for making the climate unliveable. Most big international banks, including France’s BNP Paribas, Crédit Agricole and Société Générale, have helped finance these projects and are making huge profits on them, providing backing for a mass crime against humanity and the environment.
Rather than paying lip service to climate adaptation (futile once global warming reaches a certain threshold), governments should be prioritising efforts to slow greenhouse gas emissions and other harmful activities, and taking action against the companies responsible. There are still many things that could help stop the descent into irreversible catastrophe:
– We should require businesses to show on their balance sheets the impact of their activities on human health and natural resources. In many cases, the dividends they pay shareholders come from harmful activities; they total more than $5tr a year according to IMF estimates (2) and should be sanctioned.
– Public finances, in other words tax and subsidy systems, should be restructured to force companies to cease harmful activities and contribute to sustainable adaptation.
– Banks that continue to finance the destruction of human health and natural resources should be required to pay the kind of penalties applied to those who fund criminal activities (drug trafficking, terrorism etc).
– Inequality must be eradicated: the world’s richest 10% are responsible for 60% of greenhouse gas emissions. Since they can easily cope with, or circumvent, indirect fiscal pressure, it’s important to attack the source of their privilege – their income, assets and influence. Although the ‘exceptional’ and ‘temporary’ tax rates recommended in policy thinktank France Stratégie’s report (3) are low, they were condemned by the economy, finance and industry minister. Was this short-sightedness or collusion?
– Funds need to be transferred from wealthy countries, which bear historical responsibility for global warming, to less developed countries, which are often its first victims (4). US special presidential envoy for climate John Kerry estimates $3-4tr a year will be required; a recent study puts the figure at around $6tr a year (5).
Poorer countries need help
Denouncing the idea that adaptation to 4°C of warming is possible does not mean abandoning all efforts to prepare for the consequences of current global warming projections, remembering that this will not be possible for those of modest means unless there is a significant redistribution of income and assets.
Not all solutions are equally good. Cereal farmers in Nebraska, US, have developed an irrigation system that adjusts the volume of water to the needs of the crop (measured using soil moisture probes) and enables them to cut groundwater pumping by 20%, while growers in France’s Poitou-Charentes region continue to irrigate indiscriminately, with groundwater stored in artificial open-air megabasins.
Few countries have met their commitments to the UN’s 2015 Paris climate accord which were inadequate even then
But while the Nebraska farmers have achieved considerable water savings, they still don’t see that their agroindustrial methods are unsustainable. In their approach, the soil is merely a vehicle for fertilisers and biocides. This leads to devastating pollution, not only of the soil, but also of inland waterways, coastal waters and even the atmosphere (through emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), a greenhouse gas 280 times more damaging than carbon dioxide). It’s unsustainable in the long term.
Millions of farmers in India, already facing severe climate change, are coming to the end of what the ‘green revolution’, based on the selection of more efficient crop varieties and over-use of chemical inputs, had to offer. In the southern state of Andhra Pradesh, with government support, they are turning to agroecology. A number of different crops are grown in parallel or in rotation to maintain soil fertility and act as a barrier to harmful organisms. And trees are planted among the crops, helping to manage water and capturing atmospheric nitrogen for their own growth and that of the surrounding crops. Meanwhile, European economists and agronomists have shown that the agroecological approach could feed the entire population of the EU decently, provided consumer tastes and habits also changed (6).


Diplomatique 4
Climate change: adapt to stay the same
Our societies cannot adapt to an average temperature rise of 4ºC. Yet adaptation is now being touted as a (magical) way of maintaining the political and economic status quo.
F
rance’s minister for ecological transition Christophe Béchu caused alarm in February 2023 by saying he wanted to prepare France for a temperature increase of 4ºC. There was further alarm in December after the COP28 meeting, when he announced his climate change adaptation plan: ‘A trajectory of 4ºC is not being pessimistic; it’s relying very precisely on what specialists from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] and the United Nations are telling us, with a current trend in climate change leading us to a global increase of 2.8-3.2ºC, which translates to 4ºC for our country’.
This apparent pragmatism presumes international agreements will not be adhered to and will fail to adequately ‘mitigate’ warming through greenhouse gas emission reductions. Such a focus on adaptation has the advantage of indefinitely postponing politically costly decisions on mitigation. Currently, mitigation and adaptation policies are presented simplistically, as though their interconnection were straightforward, suggesting more adaptation can make up for insufficient mitigation.
This strategy conceals assumptions which don’t match the facts. It assumes adjustment to climate change impacts can happen gradually, like a dyke being raised by a single row of bricks at a time, though the ability to adjust will diminish in an increasingly unstable economic, industrial and political climate.
Though IPCC Working Group II (Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability) takes political and economic stability as a given, it implicitly recognises that above +1.5°C, its assessment of the scope for adaptation is a speculative response to a poorly defined problem. The working group’s co-chairs Hans-Otto Pörtner and Debra Roberts stress that adapting to +4°C is impossible. The IPCC has misled policymakers by adopting a supposedly apolitical position; this is in fact built on an unchanging economic model, in a context of sustainable development that excludes the risks 
Ansa 1
Climate Crisis: Mediterranean hit new record temp in 2023
WWF says waters getting saltier, more jellyfish, alien species
The average temperature of surface water in the Mediterranean Sea hit a new record of 21.1°C in April 2023, as the area continued to be a "climate change hotspot", according to a report released by WWF Italia on Friday.
        The report, entitled 'The Breath of the Oceans (Il Respiro degli Oceani) and released ahead of World Oceans Day on Saturday, said this was almost a degree higher than the average for the 1850-1900 period.
        It said the climate crisis was leading the Mediterranean to become saltier too and higher temperatures were enabling alien species to migrate into the warming waters of the Mediterranean Sea and replaced endemic species, and boosting the spread of jellyfish.
        WWF said at the moment of 8.33% of the Mediterranean's waters are protected, a level that needs to come up to 30% by 2030.
   
Ansa 2
Italy ranks 43rd for Climate Change Performance -report (3)
New gas capacities authorized, renewable potential not reached
Italy came 43rd in the latest Climate Change Performance Index (CCPI) presented on Wednesday at the COP29 UN Climate Conference in Baku.
        The report drafted by Germanwatch, the Climate Action Network and the New Climate Institute, with Italian association Legambiente contributing, gave Italy a medium rating in greenhouse gas emissions and energy use, and a low one in renewable energy and climate policy.
        The report said new fossil fuel gas capacities have been authorized in Italy and the country's renewable energy potential has not been reached.
        It said there is no action plan for ending Italy's fossil fuel subsidies, which the latest IMF report says amount to USD 63 billion.
        It said Italy should set a more ambitious coal phase-out date and halt the expansion of fossil fuel extraction and infrastructure, as well as reaching an economy-wide emissions reduction of 65% by 2030 to be in line with the 1.5°C Paris goal.
        This year's ranking is a slight improvement on last year's, when Italy came 44th after dropping 15 positions.
        The CCPI tracks the climate mitigation performance of 63 countries and the EU.
        "The climate crisis is an existential threat to life on Earth.
        To reduce the magnitude of the crisis' impacts, we must limit global warming to 1.5°C, as decided in the Paris Agreement," says the CCPI website.
        "Only decisive action will reduce greenhouse gas emissions, which are responsible for climate change.
        "As an independent monitoring tool, the CCPI has a leading role in informing on the Paris Agreement's implementation phase.
        "Since 2005, the CCPI has provided analysis of countries' climate protection performance.
"It creates transparency in climate policy, makes it possible to compare climate protection efforts, and lets you see progress and setbacks".
 
Ansa 3
Above-freezing week added by climate change in Italy'
Between 2014 and 2023 says Climate Central
Contenuti sponsorizzati
ROME, 17 December 2024, 09:41
Climate change due primarily to burning oil, coal and methane gas has caused on average a week-long increase in winter days above freezing in Italy during the 2014-2023 period, according to a research carried out by US NGO Climate Central, which analysed winters in 123 countries and 901 cities worldwide.
        The research found that the northwestern Italian city of Turin ranked third in the world for the number of winter days above freezing, otherwise called lost winter days, added by climate change - on average 30 a year, out of a total of 64, which would otherwise have been below zero.Turin came in third behind Fuji in Japan and Kuijand, in Tajikistan.Verona, Brescia and Milan in northern Italy lost respectively 29, 26 and 22 winter days, said the study. 
  
Ansa 4
378 extreme climate events in Italy in 2023, +22%
Legambiente reports 31 deaths and billions of euro in damage
ROME, 28 December 2023, 13:27
There have been 378 extreme climate events in Italy in 2023, a 22% increase over 2022, environmental watchdog Legambiente said on Thursday.
Extreme heat or bad weather have led to the death of 31 people and caused billions of euro in damage to property, infrastructure and crops.
Northern Italy, with 210 extreme weather events, was the area worst affected, followed by the Centre (98) and the South (70), according to Legambiente's Climate City Observatory. Floods and river overflows increased by 170% compared to 2022, record temperatures in urban areas rose by 150%, landslides caused by heavy rainfall grew by 64%, sea storms rose by 44% and hail damage increased by 34.5%, the environmental organisation said.
        In the Alps, the freezing point has risen to 5,328 metres above sea level and glaciers are retreating.
        2023 is to be remembered in particular for the flooding and landslide emergency in Emilia Romagna caused by two separate bouts of extreme bad weather in May and for successive summer heatwaves in the south and simultaneous extreme bad weather in the north.
        However, Legambiente has recorded in total 118 cases of flooding caused by heavy rain, 82 cases of damage caused by whirlwinds and gusts of wind, 39 cases of damage caused by hailstorms, 35 cases of river flooding causing damage, 26 cases of damage caused by sea storms, 21 cases of damage caused by prolonged drought, 20 cases of extreme temperatures in cities, 18 cases of landslides caused by heavy rainfall, 16 events involving damage to infrastructure and 3 events involving damage to historical heritage.
        At regional level, the association said Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna have been most impacted by the negative effects of climate change with, respectively, 62 and 59 events causing damage, followed by Tuscany with 44, Lazio with 30, Piedmont with 27, Veneto with 24 and Sicily with 21.
        At city level, Rome, Milan, Fiumicino, Palermo and Prato have reportedly borne the brunt of the bad weather.
        "Extreme weather events are increasing in frequency and intensity, and it is the territories and citizens who are paying the price," said Legambiente President Stefano Ciafani, calling on the government of Premier Giorgia Meloni to "approve immediately the National Climate Adaptation Plan" and "also allocate the relevant economic resources, which instead we continue to spend on post-disaster interventions, as demonstrated by the 11 billion euro spent just in response to the damage caused by the two floods in Emilia-Romagna and Tuscany".
        "The risk is that without the Plan and adequate (resource) allocation for prevention, which are also absent from the Budget Law that is about to be approved, Italy will continue to chase after emergencies," said Ciafani.
        "The government should instead make a much greater commitment, focusing on prevention, climate adaptation policies and awareness campaigns on living with risk, to transform our country from being the most exposed at the centre of the Mediterranean to being an example for others," he concluded.
Eukalert 1
Study explores how climate change impacts extreme cold events
Peer-Reviewed Publication
University at Albany, SUNY
ALBANY, N.Y. (Feb. 27, 2025) — Despite being among the warmest years on record, eastern China was hit by an unexpected extreme cold event in December 2023 that caused transportation shutdowns, power supply shortages and agricultural damage. 
A new study led by Qian Cheng from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, in collaboration with a team of researchers including Aiguo Dai from the University at Albany, examined the 2023 event to better understand how the warming effect of climate change drives or suppresses these types of extreme cold waves.   
Their analysis found that the event could largely be attributed to unusual large-scale atmospheric circulation (wind patterns), which accounted for 83 percent of its intensity. However, they also found that the warming effect of climate change reduced the event’s severity by up to 22 percent. 
Findings were published in the journal npj Climate and Atmospheric Science.  
“Extreme cold events, like the one in China in December 2023, often have major impacts on various sectors of our society,” said Dai, a Distinguished Professor in UAlbany’s Department of Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences. “Understanding how these events may change due to climate change can help us to stay better informed and prepared for the future. It also gives us more insight into how these events occur under a warming climate.” 
To reach their analysis, the researchers used a combination of historical weather data and climate simulations to estimate how atmospheric circulation and global warming contributed to the 2023 cold event. 
Using similar techniques, they also found that the likelihood and intensity of similar cold events has already dropped by over 92 percent and 1.9 degrees Celsius, respectively, compared to a world without the current global warming trends. They are projected to become even rarer and milder by the end of the century—decreasing in frequency by 95 percent and more than 2 degrees Celsius. 
Dai cautions that these cold events will not disappear entirely and that we should be prepared for how climate change impacts extreme weather in other ways, such as more frequent wildfires, droughts and severe storms. 
“Studies have shown that while the overall global temperature is rising due to climate change, extreme cold events can still occur and may even become more frequent in certain regions due to the rapid warming of the Arctic,” Dai said. “Global warming also has many other adverse effects besides its impact on cold events. These findings are a good first step to better understanding how the warming climate impacts weather patterns. We plan to continue our analysis for other types of extreme events.” 
Dai is among the most cited scientists in his field with more than 200 published journal articles related to climate science. Among his other recent research includes a 2024 study that linked Arctic sea ice loss to the intensity of El Niño events. 




Eukalert 2
Scientists can now predict how climate change will alter plant growth cycles
On February 2, 1887, residents of Punxsutawney Pennsylvania consulted a large rodent regarding the arrival of spring, marking the first official celebration of Groundhog Day. According to Rob Guralnick, curator of biodiversity informatics at the Florida Museum of Natural History, our ability to predict the timing of seasons hasn’t improved much since then.
“We can’t generate good forecasts for whether spring will arrive early or late next year nearly as well as we can make predictions about the weather,” he said.
Weather patterns influence when a season begins and ends, but the ways in which plants and animals respond to these patterns, called phenology, is just as crucial. Meteorologists can make reliable temperature forecasts months in advance, but when it comes to predicting when a species of tree will start growing leaves throughout its range, scientists are often left shrugging. 
When complex factors like climate change are added to the mix, such predictions become even more difficult to make.
But a new study published in the journal Communications Earth & Environment is set to make seasonal forecasting a little less onerous and a lot more reliable. The authors enhanced existing approaches used to predict phenology and added a measurement of how fast an area warms in spring. This improvement allowed the authors to predict how the timing of leaf and flower production would change over a period spanning more than 150 years.
Plant species in the U.S. are flowering three to four weeks earlier than they did 150 years ago
The breakthrough was sparked by the rediscovery of an old 19th-century report containing thousands of detailed phenological observations for plants and animals throughout the eastern United States. The observations represent the earliest effort organized under the Smithsonian Institution to monitor biological cycles in the United states with volunteer collections, making it the first phenology-based citizen science project in the country.
Using these historical growth patterns as a starting point, the authors tested the accuracy of their equations. Given that plants produced leaves and flowers at a certain time in the 1850s, they predicted how the timing of those patterns would have changed 17 years later. They compared their results with modern observations to see how well they matched up.
Theresa Crimmins, the director of the USA National Phenology Network and co-author of the study, happened across the report while working on a book chapter about phenology. “I dug up this old document and realized there was actual data in it. Most of the other reports that had been referenced were just summaries.”
The report was the result of a short-lived citizen science network established by the Smithsonian Institution to monitor seasonal conditions and was published in two volumes by the U.S. Patent Office. The production of volume two, which contains the data on plants and animals — was significantly delayed due to a flurry of official documents that needed to be printed during the Civil War. When it finally made its way into print, the second half of the report contained information on when dozens of plants produced leaves, flowers and fruit from Michigan to Florida and as far west as California. 
“This is the oldest dataset we have where we’re looking at broad-scale phenology, and the change between then and now is striking,” Guralnick said.
To test their equations, the authors began by comparing the historical growth cycles with observations made within the last decade for 18 plant species. They anticipated differences between the two time periods caused by climate change, but they were unprepared for the magnitude of how much had been altered.
“All 18 species advanced their leaf growth and flowering phenology,” Crimmins said. “On average, it’s occurring more than three weeks earlier than it did in the past. There are some species that are flowering more than a month earlier.”
The fact that global warming has resulted in earlier springs and longer summers is well-established, but owing to the lack of historical data, it’s rare to obtain confirmation that spans such a large breadth of time.
Rate of springtime warming influences when plants produce leaves and flowers
Not all areas — or all species — in the eastern U.S. have experienced the same rate of change over 175 years. Phenology in the northeastern U.S. has, for example, advanced to a greater degree than in the Southeast. The well-worn equations that have been used to predict leaf growth and flowering time have been unable to account for this and other seemingly anomalous patterns.
Normally, scientists use two broad variables to predict phenology: where the plant is located and how much warm weather it needs to become active. This tends to work well for individual species in a limited area, but it’s less effective at predicting broad changes, like the arrival of spring for an entire forest.
This limitation is generally attributed to large amounts of variation within and between species.
A maple tree will respond differently than an oak, for example, and an oak in one area will respond differently than an individual of the same species in another.
Climate change throws another curve ball.
“Not only is there variation across species, there’s variation across latitudes in the rate of global warming. Climate is warming faster at higher latitudes,” said co-author Lindsay Campbell, an assistant professor at the University of Florida’s Florida Medical Entomology Laboratory.
But even when scientists account for this unequal warming, there are other patterns that have so far eluded explanation. Red maples, for example, are among the earliest active plants in eastern North America. In late winter and early spring, leafless maples send out numerous crimson flowers that stand out among other bare and dormant trees like a signal flare. Pink azaleas take a more measured approach, with leaves and flowers arriving later in the season, towards mid-Spring. But in some conditions, this sequence can be reversed, and what are generally considered to be later-flowering plants — such as pink azaleas — can bear flowers before those considered to be early bloomers — like maples — that grow at the same latitude.
Guralnick suspected there was a missing piece of the puzzle that, if found, would help make sense of the patterns.  In addition to a plant’s location and warmth requirements, he added a measurement for warming velocity, the rate at which heat is ratcheted up during spring. Areas next to large bodies of water tend to have slow warming velocities, because water takes longer to heat than air. Since water also retains warmth longer than air, these areas also tend to have warmer winters. He drew some back-of-the-napkin sketches and sought help from Crimmins and Campbell to refine the idea and develop a model for how warming velocity along with warm requirements might both determine phenology.
To test the idea, two museum interns, Michaela Keys and Carolyn Davis, digitized the historical data from the Smithsonian report. Co-author Erin Grady, a graduate student in the UF department of biology, compiled modern observations taken by citizen scientists that are publicly available through iNaturalist and the National Phenology Network. 
After running the numbers, their intuition was confirmed. With the addition of warming velocity, their predictions accurately aligned with the patterns in their data.
It also provided an explanation for the patterns that until then had proven intractable, such as later-flowering plants outpacing early bloomers. Though they generally flower late, a pink azalea in an area where spring temperatures increase rapidly can end up producing flowers before a maple growing in an area where temperatures climb more slowly.
The increased accuracy at predicting cycles within ecosystems may give conservationists a leg up when it comes to planning ahead. As global temperatures continue to increase due to climate change, species are not only changing up when they do things, but they’re also doing them in different places as their distributions shift, Guralnick said.
“I’ve always been skeptical about whether we’ll be able to predict what the world will look like in the near future, but I think we’re getting better at it as we take a more holistic view and as we get the underlying processes nailed down. Doing so helps us manage the diversity we have left.”
Eukalert 3
The Lancet: Health threats of climate change reach record-breaking levels, as experts call for trillions of dollars spent on fossil fuels to be redirected towards protecting people’s health, lives and livelihoods
Peer-Reviewed Publication
The Lancet
Facebook
X
LinkedIn
WeChat
Bluesky
Message
WhatsApp
Email
The Lancet: Health threats of climate change reach record-breaking levels, as experts call for trillions of dollars spent on fossil fuels to be redirected towards protecting people’s health, lives and livelihoods
* New global findings in the 8th annual indicator report of the Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change reveal that people in every country face record-breaking threats to health and survival from the rapidly changing climate, with 10 of 15 indicators tracking health threats reaching concerning new records.
* In 2023, people were exposed to, on average, an unprecedented 50 more days of health-threatening temperatures than expected without climate change. Extreme drought affected 48% of the global land area - the second-highest level recorded – and the higher frequency of heatwaves and droughts was associated with 151 million more people experiencing moderate or severe food insecurity than annually between 1981 and 2010.
* Authors call out governments and companies who continue “fuelling the fire” with persistent investment in fossil fuels, all-time high energy-related greenhouse gas emissions, and years of delays in adaptation that are narrowing the survival chances of people across the globe.
* Report underscores that the financial resources to deliver net zero emissions and secure a healthy future are available. Yet governments and companies are spending trillions of dollars on fossil fuel subsidies and investments that are making climate change worse—money that could be redirected towards clean renewable energy and activities that benefit people’s health, livelihoods and wellbeing.
* Authors argue that the findings must force a global health-centred transformation of financial systems – shifting resources from the fossil fuel-based economy towards a zero-emissions future – that will deliver rapid health and economic benefits through improved energy access and security, cleaner air and water, healthier diets and lifestyles, and more sustainable job opportunities. 
As multiple health threats from climate change break dangerous new records, the 2024 Report of The Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change calls for the trillions of dollars spent funding fossil fuels to be redirected and used to drive a rapid and fair transition to a net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) economy, instead of harming the health of billions of people across the world.

“This year’s stocktake of the imminent health threats of climate inaction reveals the most concerning findings yet in our eight years of monitoring,” warned Dr Marina Romanello, Executive Director of the Lancet Countdown at University College London. “Once again, last year broke climate change records—with extreme heat waves, deadly weather events, and devastating wildfires affecting people around the world. No individual or economy on the planet is immune from the health threats of climate change. The relentless expansion of fossil fuels and record-breaking greenhouse gas emissions compounds these dangerous health impacts, and is threatening to reverse the limited progress made so far, and put a healthy future further out of reach.” 

She added: “Despite this threat, we see financial resources continue to be invested in the very things that undermine our health. Repurposing the trillions of dollars being invested in, or subsidising, the fossil fuel industry every year would provide the opportunity to deliver a fair, equitable transition to clean energy and energy efficiency, and a healthier future, ultimately benefiting the global economy.”

The 8th Lancet Countdown annual indicator report, funded by Wellcome and developed in close collaboration with the World Health Organization, represents the work of 122 leading experts from 57 academic institutions and UN agencies globally, including the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO). Published ahead of the 29th UN Conference of the Parties (COP), the report provides the most up-to-date assessment of the links between health and climate change, including new metrics which record extreme precipitation, stranded coal assets, tree cover loss, sand and dust storms, rising nighttime temperatures and sleep loss, and climate and health education and training.

Record-breaking human costs of climate change

The year 2023 was the hottest on record, with persistent droughts, deadly heat waves, and devastating forest fires, storms and floods, and disastrous impacts on the health, lives and livelihoods of people worldwide.

Heat-related deaths continue to rapidly increase, and are expected to exceed cold-related deaths in a high-warming scenario. Globally in 2023, heat-related deaths in those over age 65 increased by a record-breaking 167% above deaths in the 1990s, substantially above the 65% increase that would have been expected had temperatures not changed (i.e., accounting only for changing demographics). This compounds existing inequities, with the number of health-threatening heat days added by climate change higher in countries with a low human development index (a measure of education, income, and life expectancy). 

Worldwide in 2023, people were also exposed to, on average, an all-time high of 1,512 hours of high temperatures posing at least a moderate risk of heat stress while undertaking light outdoor exercise such as walking or cycling—a 27.7% increase (328 hours) on the 1990-1999 yearly average. Increasing temperatures have also led to a record 512 billion potential hours of labour lost globally in 2023 (a 49% increase above the 1990-1999 average), with global potential income losses equivalent to US$835 billion—equivalent to a substantial proportion of GDP in low- (7.6%) and middle-income countries (4.4%). 

During the last decade (2014-2023), 61% of the global land area saw an increase in extreme precipitation events compared to the 1961-1990 average, increasing the risk of flooding, infectious disease, and water contamination. In parallel, more frequent heatwaves and droughts were responsible for 151 million more people experiencing moderate to severe food insecurity in 124 countries in 2022, than annually between 1981 and 2010. As a result, the report estimates the total yearly value of economic losses (linked to physical assets rather than ill-health) resulting from extreme weather events at US$227 billion from 2019-2023, a value that exceeds the GDP of 60% of the world’s economies. 

The climatic suitability for the spread of deadly mosquito-borne infectious diseases has also increased. For example, the transmission risk of dengue by Aedes albopictus mosquitoes rose by 46% and Aedes aegypti by 11% over the last decade (2014-2023) compared to 1951-1960. An all-time high of over 5 million dengue cases were reported in over 80 countries/territories in 2023 [1]. 

“People in all parts of the world are increasingly suffering from the financial and health effects of climate change, and disadvantaged communities in resource-limited nations are often the worst affected, yet provided with the least financial and technological protections,” said Prof. Wenjia Cai, Lancet Countdown Working Group 4 Co-Chair at Tsinghua University. “Adaptation is failing to keep pace with the rapidly growing health threats of climate change, and with limits to adaptation looming, and universal health coverage still a pipe dream for more than half the world’s population, financial support is urgently needed to strengthen health systems to better protect people.” 

Governments and companies continue fuelling the fire, threatening to reverse limited progress

New and updated indicators reveal that governments and companies continue fuelling the fire with persistent investments in fossil fuels, all-time high GHG emissions, and staggering tree loss, reducing the survival chances of people all around the globe. In 2023, global energy-related carbon dioxide emissions reached an all-time high, 1.1% above 2022, and the proportion of fossil fuels in the global energy system increased for the first time in a decade during 2021, reaching 80.3% of all energy (up from 80.1% in 2020). 

While climate action is limited by the lack of funding, fossil fuel investment still attracted 36.6% of global energy investment in 2023, with many governments also increasing explicit fossil fuel subsidies in response to soaring energy prices following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. In 2022, 72 of the 86 countries (84%) analysed in the report subsidised fossil fuels for a record net total of US$1.4 trillion (taking into account the contribution of both carbon pricing and fossil fuel subsidies), dwarfing any financial commitments in support of climate action made at COP28. These subsidies exceeded 10% of national health spending in 47 of the countries, and 100% in 23 countries. 

Against this concerning backdrop, the Loss and Damage Fund established at COP27 in 2022 to support countries most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, received initial pledges totalling the much smaller sum of US$700 million, which amounted to less than 0.2% of the estimated requirement every year [2]. Similarly, the decade-long delay in delivering the comparatively modest sum of US$100 billion a year promised to support vulnerable countries cope with climate change has hampered progress and widened global inequities.

Bolstered by record profits, the world’s 114 largest oil and gas companies (covering 80% of all production projected by 2040) have increased their projected fossil fuel production levels since last year, which would lead to their GHG emissions exceeding levels compatible with 1.5°C of warming by 59% in 2030, and a staggering 189% in 2040, further reducing their compliance with the Paris Agreement. Worse still, 33 of these companies are expected to exceed their 1.5°C-compatible GHG emissions by over 300% in 2040. 

Added to this, new data from this year’s report estimates that almost 182 million hectares of forest were destroyed between 2016 (when the Paris Agreement entered into force) and 2022, equivalent to 5% of the global tree cover, diminishing the world’s natural capacity to capture carbon dioxide. The greatest tree cover losses were in Russia (35.8 million hectares), the USA and Canada (almost 15 million hectares in each country). At the same time, the rise in red meat and dairy intake increased diet-related deaths by 220,000 between 2016 and 2021, and contributed to a 2.9% rise in agricultural GHG emissions. 

Prof. Stella Hartinger, co-author and Lancet Countdown Latin America Director at Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, said: “Oil and gas companies – supported by many governments and the global financial system - continue to reinforce the world’s addiction to fossil fuels. In a world in which survival depends on phasing out fossil fuels, these short-sighted investments set us up for financial turmoil as we pursue a liveable future. These perverse investments, coupled with the serious failure to make the necessary structural changes in the energy sector to support the net-zero transition, are jeopardising the economies on which people’s livelihoods depend, and leaving the health and survival of millions of people at risk.”

Redirecting funding to actions that benefit—rather than harm—people’s health 

Despite the record-breaking health harms laid out in the report, there are some reasons for cautious optimism. Deaths from fossil fuel-derived air pollution fell almost 7% from 2.25 million in 2016 to 2.09 million in 2021, with 59% of this decline due to efforts to reduce pollution from coal burning, demonstrating the life-saving potential of coal phase-out.

At the same time, the share of electricity generated by clean modern renewables reached 10.5% in 2021, almost double that of 2016 (5.5%), while global investment in clean energy grew 10% in 2023 to US$1.9 trillion, exceeding fossil fuel investment by 73%. Meanwhile, employment in renewables reached a record-high with 13.7 million employees in 2022 (35.6% increase since 2016), reaffirming that renewable energy can support job security now and in the future.
“Progress towards an equitable and healthy future requires a global transformation of financial systems, shifting resources away from the fossil-fuel based economy towards a zero-emissions future,” said co-author Prof. Anthony Costello, Co-Chair of the Lancet Countdown. “For successful reform, people’s health must be put front and centre of climate change policy to ensure the funding mechanisms protect wellbeing, reduce health inequities and maximise health gains, especially for the countries and communities that need it most.”
The report notes that the engagement of individuals, corporations, scientists, and international organisations with climate change and health is growing, raising hopes that a healthy, prosperous future could still be within reach. 

“Amidst global turmoil, the powerful and trusted leadership of the health community could hold the key to reversing these concerning trends and harnessing new opportunities to put the protection and promotion of health and survival at the centre of political agendas,” said Prof. Costello. “Nowhere will this be more important than at COP29 where the financial transition will take centre stage, offering a vital opportunity to deliver a resilient, healthier future.”

Responding to the report publication, UN Secretary-General, António Guterres (who was not involved in writing the report) said: “Record-high emissions are posing record-breaking threats to our health. We must cure the sickness of climate inaction – by slashing emissions, protecting people from climate extremes, and ending our fossil fuel addiction – to create a fairer, safer, and healthier future for all.”
Eukalert 4 (Italy)
Scientists issue urgent warning on climate emergency
Peer-Reviewed Publication
American Institute of Biological Sciences
A new report published in BioScience warns that the world is facing a climate emergency of unprecedented magnitude. The "2024 State of the Climate Report," by an international team of scientists led by Oregon State University's William Ripple and Christopher Wolf, presents alarming evidence that climate change is worsening at a dangerous pace.
In the report, the authors update 35 annually reported "planetary vital signs," which provide ongoing timeseries of human climate-related activities and climate responses. Among the authors' key findings:
* Record-breaking temperatures and sea levels in 2023
* Annual energy-related emissions exceeding 40 gigatons of carbon dioxide equivalent for the first time on record.
* Accelerating loss of ice sheets and glaciers
* Rising frequency of billion-dollar climate-related disasters
The authors state: "We are on the brink of an irreversible climate disaster. This is a global emergency beyond any doubt. Much of the very fabric of life on Earth is imperiled." The report highlights several climate "tipping points" and feedback loops that could trigger catastrophic changes, including the collapse of major ice sheets and widespread forest dieback. The authors also discuss emerging threats such as Arctic rivers turned orange by toxic metals, an effect that coincides with permafrost thaw.
"We are stepping into a critical and unpredictable new phase of the climate crisis," the scientists warn. They emphasize that current policies have placed Earth track for approximately 2.7 degrees Celsius of warming by 2100, far exceeding the internationally agreed limit of 1.5°C.
"We’re already in the midst of abrupt climate upheaval, which jeopardizes life on Earth like nothing humans have ever seen," added William Ripple. "For example, Hurricane Helene caused more than 200 deaths in the southeastern United States and massive flooding in a North Carolina mountain area thought to be a safe haven from climate change."
The authors call for urgent action, including:
* Implement a global carbon price that could limit emissions by the wealthy while potentially providing funding for further climate action.
* Enhance energy efficiency and conservation while replacing fossil fuels with low-carbon renewables.
* Curb emissions of greenhouse gases, including those categorized as short-term pollutants such as methane.
* Protect and restore biodiverse ecosystems, which play key roles in carbon cycling and storage.
* Encourage a shift toward eating habits that emphasize plant-based foods.
* Promote sustainable ecological economics and greatly reduce overconsumption and waste by the wealthy.
* Integrate climate change education into global curriculums to boost awareness, literacy and action.
"The future of humanity hangs in the balance," the report concludes. "Only through decisive action can we safeguard the natural world, avert profound human suffering, and ensure that future generations inherit the livable world they deserve."
Rainews 1 (Italy)
Copernicus: "May 2024 is the twelfth consecutive month with record temperatures"
This is the twelfth consecutive month in which the global average temperature has reached a record value compared to the previous corresponding months. Guterres' speech on climate from the American Museum of Natural History in New York
This May 2024 was ‘the warmest May’ on record globally , the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) of the European Commission has announced, adding that the global mean surface air temperature was 0.65C above the 1991-2020 average, marking the twelfth consecutive month for which the global mean temperature reached a record value for the corresponding month , based on ERA5 data.
The 12-month streak is confirmed as the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the UK Meteorological Office publish their Annual to Decadal Climate Prediction Update, which summarises the annual decadal forecasts made by these institutions for the near future for the period 2024-2028. This report shows, among many other findings, that at least one of the next five years is likely to be the warmest on record, beating 2023.
Data from the Copernicus Climate Change Service for May show that: "The global average temperature for May 2024 was 1.52°C above the 1850-1900 pre-industrial average, marking the eleventh consecutive month (since July 2023) at or above 1.5°C. The global average temperature over the last 12 months (June 2023 – May 2024) is the highest on record , 0.75°C above the 1991-2020 average and 1.63°C above the 1850-1900 pre-industrial average." 
The 12-month streak comes at the same time as the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the UK Meteorological Office publish their annual-decadal climate forecast update, which summarises the annual-decadal forecasts made by these institutions for the period 2024-2028. This report shows, among many other findings, that at least one of the next five years is likely to be the warmest on record, beating 2023.
Carlo Buontempo, Director of C3S , comments: "It is shocking but not surprising that we have reached this series of 12 consecutive months. Even if this sequence of record months is eventually broken, the general sign of climate change remains and there is no sign in sight of a change in this trend." He adds: " We live in unprecedented times, but we also have unprecedented capabilities in monitoring the climate and this can help guide our actions . This series of warmer months will be remembered as relatively cold, but if we manage to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere in the very near future we may be able to return to these "cold" temperatures by the end of the century ." 
Data from the Copernicus Climate Change Service and the WMO-UK Met Office report will be used to support a major climate statement by United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who will deliver a speech on World Environment Day at the American Museum of Natural History today.
UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said that "over the past year, every turn of the calendar has seen temperatures rise. Our planet is trying to tell us something. But we don't seem to be listening . We are shattering global temperature records and reaping the storm. It is time for climate crisis. Now is the time to mobilize, act and deliver."
Rainews 2 
Extreme heat threatens to kill five times as many people by 2050
According to the Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change report, the number of heat-related deaths could increase 4.7-fold by mid-century
Global warming could almost quintuple heat- related deaths if immediate action is not taken to limit the temperature increase below 1.5°C . This is what emerges from the annual report of the scientific journal 'The Lancet'  ('2023 Lancet countdown on health and climate change') dedicated to health and climate change , which states, among other elements, that "the world is facing irreversible damage" and that is why "the imperative" is to offer "a response focused on health" .
“The world is going in the wrong direction,” it says, “with continued investment and subsidies to the fossil fuel sector and a low priority on the just energy transition .” The report — conducted by University College London , representing the work of 114 experts from 52 research institutions and UN agencies around the world, including the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) — presents 47 indicators that include new and improved metrics to monitor household air pollution, fossil fuel financing, and international organizations’ commitment to the health benefits of climate mitigation. It also comes at a crucial time, as we are now at the end of the hottest year on record and just days before the start of the United Nations Climate Change Summit, COP28, scheduled to take place in Dubai . 
According to the report, "the lack of action to tackle climate change is leading to loss of life and worse living conditions". It highlights how " heat-related deaths among the elderly" have "increased by 85% in the last decade and climate change" is "impacting essential systems such as water, sanitation and food production". Furthermore, " economic losses linked to extreme weather events are increasing and are hitting low and medium Human Development Index (HDI) countries the hardest, worsening global inequalities". For the first time in the history of climate conferences, there will be an entire day dedicated to health; a declaration on health and climate is expected to be adopted on this occasion , but experts believe that recognition of the main cause of public health failure is lacking: fossil fuels. An open letter signed by 46 million health professionals, addressed to the President of COP28 Sultan Al Jaber, urges him to "commit to a faster, fairer and more equitable phase-out of fossil fuels and to invest in a renewable energy transition" .
In 2022, people were exposed to an average of 86 days of health-threatening high temperatures . 
The authors denounce "the negligence of governments, corporations and banks that continue to invest in oil and gas as the challenges and costs of adaptation increase and the world approaches irreversible damage. The authors warn that without decisive and rapid mitigation action to address the root causes of climate change, the health of humanity is gravely at risk ." They also outline "the opportunity that a just energy transition" can deliver "reductions in health inequalities and improve the health and well-being of all populations." What is needed is " urgent health-focused climate action ," to shift "the global economy toward a zero-carbon economy, while also offering transformative opportunities to improve the health of the world's populations through improved access and energy security, cleaner air, safer drinking water, healthier diets and lifestyles, and more liveable cities."
Rainews 3 
Climate, Copernicus: “Towards a record 2024”. In July the two hottest days on Earth
New data from the European service: “July 2024 is the second warmest month on record”
2024 is "increasingly likely" to be the warmest year on record , despite July ending a 13-month streak of monthly hot temperatures , the Copernicus Climate Change Service has said .
July 2024: Second Hottest Month on Record
The European Climate Change Service says last month was the second warmest on record since 1940 , only slightly cooler than July 2023.
Copernicus: Second warmest month on record globally, only slightly behind July 2023 - 08 August 2024 (Copernicus Press Office)
The two hottest days on Earth in July
Although July 2024 was not as warm on average as July 2023, Earth experienced its two warmest days in the ERA5 data record. The daily global mean temperature reached 17.16°C and 17.15°C in ERA5 on 22 and 23 July. 
Copernicus: Second warmest month on record globally, only slightly behind July 2023 - 08 August 2024 (Copernicus Press Office)
Burgess: “Our climate continues to warm ”
“The series of record months has ended, but only by a hair’s breadth,” says Samantha Burgess , Deputy Director of Copernicus. Last month, the global average temperature was 16.91 degrees Celsius, just 0.04 degrees lower than in July 2023, according to the C3S monthly bulletin. But “the overall picture has not changed, our climate continues to warm ,” says Burgess. “The devastating effects of climate change began well before 2023 and will continue until global greenhouse gas emissions reach net zero,” she stresses. 
From January to July, global temperatures were 0.70 C above the 1991-2020 average. This anomaly would need to decrease significantly over the rest of the year for 2024 to not be warmer than 2023, "making it increasingly likely that 2024 will be the warmest year on record," the Copernicus Climate Change Service said. 
'Unprecedented' heat in Death Valley: peaks of 55 degrees: video from the USA
08/07/2024
Open content
Sea temperature above 20 degrees
The sea surface temperature (SST) for July 2024 over 60°S–60°N was 20.88 °C, the second highest value on record  for the month and only 0.01 °C below July 2023. This marks the end of a 15-month period where the SST was the warmest compared to the same month the previous year, Copernicus reports. The equatorial Pacific had below-average temperatures, indicating a developing La Niña, but air temperatures over the ocean remained unusually high in many regions. Different datasets may not confirm the 12-month series highlighted here, due to the relatively small margins above 1.5 °C in global temperatures for July and August 2023 and May and June 2024 and differences between datasets.
Rainews 4 ( Italy)
Greenland Loses 30 Million Tons of Ice Every Hour
Due to global warming, since 1985 a trillion tons of fresh water have ended up in the sea, says research. Ocean currents are changing, seas are rising by 1 or 2 meters. In 2025 the critical level
 17/01/2024
Greenland is losing an average of 30 million tons of ice every hour . Since 1985, five thousand square kilometers of ice have been lost to the sea. The cause, obviously, is the rise in global temperatures . This was revealed by a study conducted by NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and published in the journal "Nature". The data reveal that the ice is melting 20 percent more than previously calculated. Scientists fear that the Greenland ice sheet is close to a critical and irreversible melting point. 


Furthermore, the study says, this additional source of fresh water pouring into the North Atlantic could lead to a collapse of the ocean currents , the so-called Atlantic Meridional Circulation, in 2025, with serious consequences for humanity. "If you dump fresh water into the North Atlantic Ocean, you will definitely get a weakening of this circulation," which is already at its weakest point in the last 1,600 years. Scientists also believe that a significant part of the Greenland ice sheet itself is close to irreversible melting: the melting of this ice, a trillion tons of water, is equivalent to a sea level rise of 1 to 2 meters .
In the study, scientists analyzed satellite photos to determine the location of several Greenland glaciers each month from 1985 to 2022. The examination showed widespread and widespread shortening, with trillions of tons of ice lost. 
“The changes around Greenland are huge: Almost all the glaciers have retreated in recent decades,” says researcher Chad Greene. 
Scientists also used artificial intelligence techniques to map more than 235,000 glacier terminal locations over 38 years, at a resolution of 120 meters. This showed that the Greenland ice sheet has lost an area of ​​about five thousand square kilometers of ice since 1985. Other measurements of Greenland’s ice sheet have found that 221 billion tons of ice have been lost each year since 2003. The new study adds another 43 billion tons per year, bringing the total loss to about 30 million tons per hour on average.